 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
09 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 357 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 265 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
09 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 3 of 265 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 09 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning everybody.  Well you will 
have to switch on your microphone otherwise I will not hear 
you.   
ADV OLDWADGE:  Morning Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  We deal with the – Mr 
Gama’s application for leave to cross-examine Mr Todd.  I 
did have a look at the supplementary affidavit yesterday I 
am not sure whether it should have been filed but it does 
say that it was just to err on the side of caution.   
10 
 
Yes you can – you may start. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you Mr Chair.  So insofar as the 
application for condonation is concerned I submit with 
respect at the outset that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you can – you can take it that I do not 
have difficulty with condonation. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   I am indebted Mr Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I will then proceed to deal with what I 
term to be the merits of the application and at the outset I 
20 
wish to make reference to the opening statement of the 
legal 
team 
of 
the 
commission 
and 
in 
particular 
at 
paragraph 30 thereof and I quote as follows: 
“Where 
the 
commission 
is 
asked 
to 
interrogate an issue the legal team will not 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 4 of 265 
 
presume a particular outcome.  Witnesses 
may 
have 
different 
even 
contradictory 
versions in relation to a particular factual 
allegation or set of facts.  It is our function 
to 
explore 
all 
material 
and 
relevant 
versions.” 
 
My emphasis Chair of course being on the caption 
the legal team will not presume a particular outcome and 
the context of this application that serves before you Mr 
Chair I advance the proposition having regard to that 
10 
paragraph and in particular that caption of the legal teams’ 
opening statement it certainly was envisaged that the 
approach taken by Mr Todd in opposition to this application 
for him to be subjected to cross-examination is hardly an 
appropriate one. 
 
I say with respect that much could be said about the 
fact that the commission’s legal team seems to want to rely 
on the submissions by Mr Todd in his answering affidavit. 
 
He 
says 
too 
the 
purposes 
of 
my 
argument 
fundamental things.  Firstly he says I volunteered my 
20 
testimony before the commission.  I am a seasoned 
experienced litigator if I recall correctly he says he became 
a partner of Bowmans Attorneys way back in 1998. 
 
It is not a lay witness that we are dealing with and 
by submitting that I am not conceding for one moment that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 5 of 265 
 
he is an expert witness albeit that he attempts to deliver 
expert testimony before this commission.  Much will be 
dealt with in that regard if you permit with respect our 
application to cross. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will – I will tell you what I am really 
interested in 
ADV OLDWADGE:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am very interested in whether there are 
any disputes or fact between mattes dealt with by Mr Todd 
in respect of which he has personal knowledge and matters 
10 
that Mr Gama wish to dispute or deny in terms of – in terms 
of press.  So that is the one thing. 
 
The second thing and that is not because it is less 
important than the first one actually it might be more 
important. I need you to address me on why I should grant 
Mr Gama leave to cross-examine that is if there are 
disputed facts between him and – and Mr Gama – Mr Todd.   
 
Why I should grant him relief in circumstances 
where he says in his founding affidavit that whether or not 
he presents himself to give evidence will depend on the 
20 
outcome of the application.  In other words he is not 
committing 
himself 
to 
giving 
evidence 
before 
the 
commission unequivocally and unconditionally but says 
depending on the outcome of the application and I think he 
says also depending whether it is desirable that is one of 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 6 of 265 
 
his last paragraphs that is what he says he may then make 
himself available for – whether to give evidence. 
 
Now I would be disinclined to grant leave to any 
person who says well if you rule against me I will not 
subject myself to the processes of the commission.  In 
other words I want to cross-examine other people but I do 
not want to be questioned.  So I would be disinclined to – 
to grant such a person leave.  That is my understanding of 
what he says towards the end of his founding affidavit.  
What do you say about that? 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Chair I – I submit that there is that 
possible interpretation If I might address the two questions 
posed to me by beginning with what Chair poses at the tail 
end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe just to be to be sure that you 
know what I am talking about.  I am referring to paragarph3 
5 of his founding affidavit and it reads: 
“Should 
it 
be 
necessary 
or 
desirable 
thereafter and depending on the content 
and results of the cross examination I 
20 
undertake 
to 
give 
evidence 
before 
the 
commission and to cooperate as best I can 
in order to advance the objectives of the 
commission.” 
 
That – that – but that is how I am giving you – I 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 7 of 265 
 
have given you my understanding; you might say that is 
one way but here is another way but that is part of my 
concern. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I am fully alive Mr Chair to what is 
contained in that paragraph so it was not necessary for me 
to consider it as it features in the papers and I can 
immediately respond. 
 
Perhaps to a certain extent it is praised regrettably 
ineloquently that is my starting point.  There is to be read 
into that caption nothing whatsoever which suggests that 
10 
my testimony before this commission is dependent on 
whether in fact I am granted to leave to cross-examine but 
I hasten to add this Mr Chair and it is indeed so that my 
client has been preparing an opening statement and I do 
not want to make a submission on which I am contradicted 
at a later stage and I do this purely so as to be cautious in 
my approach to what I submit to Mr Chair. 
 
It is in fact correct that Mr Gama wishes to cause 
the cross-examination of Mr Todd because he believes and 
to deal with Mr Chair ’s first question I am going to refer 
20 
and cite a perfect example of where he is accused by Mr 
Todd of being a fraudster.  There is a stark dispute of facts 
in relation to that allegation yet will with respect focus on 
the GNS contract and what transpired particularly and in 
essence during the disciplinary hearing of my client before 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 8 of 265 
 
Antrobus SC who was the Chairperson to make such a 
statement in the context of joining him almost to a 
conspiracy, a common purpose if you wish with people like 
Khanye 
and 
Senemela 
and 
to 
describe 
the 
trio 
as 
fraudsters should never have been condoned.  In fact if 
that was not an absolute allegation then my learned friend 
Mr Myburgh ought to have corrected it. 
 
I will refer in a moment to that but I do not want to 
dwell that for too long I want to return to the second 
question if you will permit me Mr Chair? 
10 
 
So perhaps ineloquently phrased but it is not 
conditional only.  The rules do not permit for that and I as 
Counsel would not permit that situation. 
 
So with respect Mr Chair must please not interpret 
that there is a conditional undertaking to give evidence in 
these proceedings.   
 
My client is a compellable competent witness as is 
by the way Mr Todd.  He will comply with the processes 
and we have already indicated and there is an informal 
arrangement as to when he will take the stand so to speak. 
20 
 
So if that answers the question it is not conditional.  
I know I sound repetitive but I want to make the position 
very clear.  My client would not take that disrespectful 
stance towards Mr Chairperson and it is not his intention. 
 
So I think what he is trying to perhaps illustrate is 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 9 of 265 
 
he would be better positioned to during his evidence refer 
to certain aspects not necessarily contradictions per se 
perhaps admissions that are elicited during the cross-
examination of Mr Todd if you will permit that and it will 
permit him as far as he sees it as a lay witness to advance 
perhaps more eloquently and efficiently his testimony 
before this commission. 
 
Mr Chair if that then addresses the second aspect 
so… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I take this issue.  Is the position that 
10 
you are saying definitely there is no intention on his part to 
make his cooperation with the commission and the giving 
of evidence that he is supposed to do dependent on 
whether his application for leave to cross-examine is 
successful or not that that is not the intention and that is 
not his position. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Absolutely not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  So it would be I repeat it would be 
disrespectful of him to do so and that is not his intention,. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay no that is fine.  And then I 
think the next thing is what the disputed facts are.  You 
mentioned the issue about fraudster.  Well just deal with 
the issue of what are the disputed facts or are disputed 
allegations of facts between the two. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 10 of 265 
 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair with respect I will address 
that issue but before I do so we – we have not having been 
traded with a copy of the commission’s bundle and I am not 
pointing fingers I am simply saying I understand that to be 
protocol so as to enable Mr Chair to follow my reasoning 
and arguments we have prepared a bundle and with Mr 
Chair ’s leave I would like to hand that up so that you can 
follow more easily.  I do not have the page numbering in 
the commission’s bundle prepared for this application so 
we have not been able to cross-reference. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no I will tell – I am not sure that I 
would need it I would simply look at his founding affidavit.  
I would look at Mr Todd’s response and the reply because 
what the disputed facts are that cross-examination is 
supposed to resolve should appear from those affidavits.  
So – so I struggled a bit as I was reading them but then 
maybe there is something I did not understand where the 
disputed facts are.  Okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV OLDWADGE:  So I – my submission with reference to 
this fraudster issue is to be found in the transcript which is 
– which is an annexure to his founding papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well start – start – start in the founding 
affidavit if you – if you do not mind. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 11 of 265 
 
ADV OLDWADGE:  This aspect – this particular aspect is 
dealt with in an overarching way during – in other words 
where we say we take issue with how he has presented his 
evidence for instance that our client is implicated but it 
does not feature per se in the application it is of 
overarching nature.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but… 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Like… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will be disinclined to grant leave and 
then the whole thing gets expanded to issues that really 
10 
were not made clear in the founding affidavit because I 
mean the commission has very – has serious constraints 
on time.  If I grant leave I will want to be sure that it is in 
respect of clear issues that have been covered in the 
papers. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Very well Mr Chair.  I will then 
commence with a reference to paragraph 4 and the way I 
have prepared this is to have regard to the replying 
affidavit in which we consider not only the founding 
affidavit by my client but also the answering affidavit 
20 
deposed to by Mr Todd.  If you will permit me. 
 
There is a cross-referencing and I will deal with 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what – what I expect you to do is 
to start with the founding affidavit and say here are the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 12 of 265 
 
paragraphs where we raise disputed facts that will be 
resolved by cross-examination.  Then to the extent that – 
and then go to the response or answering affidavit to say 
this is what he says and then if you need to go to the 
replying affidavit you may go but the founding affidavit is 
important as a starting point. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  As you please Mr Chair.  We might as 
well commence with paragraph – there is a reference to 
paragraphs 22 to 32 that is from founding affidavit page 10 
to say not only… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay do not speak too far away from the 
microphone otherwise I will not hear you and the record 
will not have – okay you said 22 to? 
ADV OLDWADGE:  At paragraphs 22 of the founding 
affidavit it is responded to by Mr Todd at paragraph 7 of his 
affidavit and it is then dealt with in the reply at paragraph 
3 continue with paragraph 4. 
 
Paragraph 22 which does not deal exactly with that 
first point in issue but it says that he sensationalised and 
he came before this commission with a motive to implicate 
20 
him and in certain respects implicate him falsely. 
 
It is a denial by our client.  Our client says that 
there is no merit to this kind of an allegation.  It places the 
entire context of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry the starting point must be this 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 13 of 265 
 
is what Mr Todd said in his evidence or in his affidavit that 
I challenge. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair I will then move on from that 
aspect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja Okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  It proves a little challenging because it 
was not quite how I planned to present this – this 
application but if we go to the very first aspect then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV 
OLDWADGE: 
 
Which 
is 
paragraph 
23. 
 
Sorry 
10 
paragraph 22 of the founding affidavit and it is referred to 
in paragraph 10 of Todd’s affidavit and then in paragraph 4 
of the replying affidavit.  What we say in paragraph per the 
founding affidavit say that: 
“The 
purpose 
of 
the 
testimony 
by 
Todd 
was 
to 
sensationalise matters and he recorded that our client had 
been copied in the email to which was attached a copy of 
the memorandum from Mr Mtetwa, General Manager of 
Transnet Rail.” 
There is a clear … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did Mr Todd say about that email? 
ADV OLDWADGE:  He said – Mr Chair he says in para 22.1 
of 
his 
affidavit 
Mr 
Gama 
states 
that 
I 
sought 
to 
sensationalise matters by pointing out that he had been 
copied in an email which in turn attached a copy of a 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 14 of 265 
 
memorandum from Mr Mtetwa.   
He then goes on and he provides an exposition of why he 
says this is not sensationalism. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I want to start … 
ADV OLDWADGE:  (Inaudible) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I want to start in – in  your 
client’s founding affidavit what does he say in his founding 
affidavit Mr Todd said about that affidavit that memo or 
email that he dispute?  Because when I was reading… 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  When I was reading the affidavit I will tell 
you what my challenge was.  I struggled to understand 
whether the issue was that Mr Gama was saying Mr Todd 
says I wrote that memo or email or – and I did not write it 
or whether he was saying Mr Todd accepts that the email 
was written by – or was drafted by somebody else but for 
me and I just signed.  So I think when he goes to his 
replying affidavit he may be using the word created – Mr 
Gama to say I did not create that memo or email.  So – so 
– and I tried to look for the email I could not – I could not 
20 
find it immediately because I wanted to see whether this is 
a situation where he, the email on the face of it or memo 
came from him.  It has got his name on but he was simply 
saying somebody else created it.  It is somebody else’s 
idea but I just had to – had to be under my name for 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 15 of 265 
 
whatever reason.  Or whether he was saying I was copied 
on it and that is all that there is to it, you know my 
connection with it.  So I was struggling.  What is the 
position as you understand it about that memo or email? 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Chair – Mr Chair Mr Gama says he was 
not the author of that memorandum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us start – let us start with what 
did Mr Todd say about him and that email. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  And that is just the point I want to 
advance before you with respect we should not remove it 
10 
out 
of 
context 
because 
what 
we 
are 
saying 
is 
sensationalise and sensationalised in this sense that my 
client was there to influence certain committees and in 
particular the Risk Committee where Mr Mtetwa ultimately 
made a submission. 
 
We are not privy to what that submission was.  So 
what is Mr Todd doing?  He is sensationalising.  He does 
not know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what is … 
ADV OLDWADGE:  He does not know. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did he say that you interpret as 
sensationalising – what did he say about that email and Mr 
Gama that is seen as sensationalising? 
ADV OLDWADGE:  He is entire evidence if you consider it 
in context with respect is to suggest that my client had a 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 16 of 265 
 
hand in and was party to influencing the powers that be at 
the – at the board level, at committee level and that my 
client was instrumental in that. 
 
Now in the ordinary context when one says he was 
copied in it would suggest at best that the person copied in 
if he had read and considered the contents to the body of 
the mail would have acquitted knowledge. 
 
But in this context it is something very different.  
My client did not have a hand in the creation of that 
memorandum and in the ordinary course Mr Todd ought to 
10 
know this protocol requires that memoranda are prepared 
and seen here as certain perks so the senior person signed 
off.  That is the context Mr Chair and I want it in cross. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay I see that in paragraph 22.1 
Mr Gama says that Mr Todd said… 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I am not following sorry Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.   
ADV OLDWADGE:  Para – so I am not following you I 
apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  No I say I see that at 
20 
paragraph 22.1 of Mr Gama’s founding affidavit where he 
deals with the issue of this email.  He says Mr Todd said 
he was copied in the email. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in other words that is what he says Mr 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 17 of 265 
 
Gama said.  Now he – he confirms in the next sentence 
that he was copied.  So that is common cause. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he says he was copied since at the 
time he occupied the position of Chief Executive Officer of 
00:26:23 there is thus nothing sinister in the fact that I had 
been copied and then that is where he stopped – I will – 
stops 
other 
than 
that 
he 
says 
Mr 
Todd 
sought 
to 
sensationalise matters.  But they agreed that he was 
copied.   
10 
 
He does not say what else Mr Todd said on the 
basis of which he says Mr Todd sought to sensationalise 
matters.   
 
In other words he accuses Mr Todd of seeking to 
sensationalise matters but other than saying Mr Todd said 
he was copied he does not provide any basis for that 
criticism as I – as I read this. 
 
Then he moves to another point.  Okay.  Is your 
understanding the same as well?  It is the same? 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  It is with respect the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  However. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 18 of 265 
 
ADV OLDWADGE:  We are losing sight of context.  That 
really is the nub of my client’s complaint in this paragraph 
and the cause for him wanting to have Mr Todd cross-
examined.  And we should never leave – lose sight of the 
context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  And that is exactly that context that 
prevailed throughout the various witness statements five of 
them – five witness statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that context … 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:  Witness statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that context should have been in the 
founding affidavit as well is it not so that Mr Cop – Todd 
could deal with it and the legal team could deal with it 
properly. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I think… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say in – to say this statement by Mr 
Todd that I was copied in regard to this email must be seen 
in the following context and then the context is set out.  
And to say that is why we say he was seeking to 
20 
sensationalise matters.  Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:  I think in the commencement and the 
fact that our client was served with not only Rule 3.3 
Notices and 10.6 Notices which required that to consider 
this evidence and this is perhaps my answer to that. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 19 of 265 
 
 
The fact that he was served with a Rule 3.3 
Notice in relation to the testimony of Mr Todd and I want to 
add this in some instances he was never given that prior 
period what we term to be reasonable notice that was not 
there but certainly in the context of the 3.3 Notice that 
says Todd is going to testify and he is going to implicate.  
In that context we say and that is to be found when we 
deal with these aspects at the commencement of his 
founding affidavit that is the purpose with which Mr Todd 
came to testify before this commission and then we say 
10 
and then he proceeds to sensationalise.  It is all with 
respect in the context of exactly that.  One should not lose 
sight of the context which is at the commencement the 
party is coming and he is going to implicate you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And by the way, with respect, before I 
allow that submission to disappear under a mist of 
obscurity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   He did just that.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
OLDWADGE: 
 
 
Through 
much 
speculation 
and 
conjecture 
through 
sensationalism 
and 
as 
I 
will 
demonstrate later if time permits me to do so with evidence 
that is not factually correct.  So we say with respect 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 20 of 265 
 
Mr Chair.  I have regard to what Rule 8.3 says.   
 
All I want to advance before Mr Chair is that this 
Commission will be in a better position to determine where 
the truth lies, particularly, when you have regard to 
paragraph 22.1 when it says...  Well, it is sensationalised 
in the context of him coming to implicate me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Because it all is aimed at one thing 
Mr Chair and I do not want to reinvent the wheel.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   It is all aimed at one thing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Gama was described as one of the 
three architects of state capture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   If we consider that allegation alone... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but hang on one second.  I think we 
have dealt with the issue of the email that he says Mr Todd 
said copied on.  He admits he was copied but he says he 
sought 
to 
sensationalise 
his 
evidence. 
 
What 
other 
20 
allegation of fact is disputed between the two of them? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   In relation to that point or might I 
continue with the affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, in relation to another point. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Oh ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 21 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am not...  Ja, other points 
...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   I am indebted ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   So if we then in turn deal with what is 
contained at paragraph 42 of the founding affidavit.  It 
deals with the participation by Mr Todd together with a 
partner of his at the law firm, Bowmans ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.   
ADV OLDWADGE:   Paragraph 23 Mr Chair of the founding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 23? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Yes? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   What happens there Mr Chair.  
Mr Chair will recall this evidence by Mr Todd where he 
says:  Well, I went to a meeting with Mr Molefe.  But we 
hear nothing more about what transpired at that meeting.  
Mister...   
20 
 
Chair, here is the importance in a knob of what I 
bounce in support of this application as it pertains to this 
paragraph.  Meeting notes were prepared.  We were never 
furnished with a copy of that but in this context again, 
because remember Mr Chair, what this seeks to achieve 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 22 of 265 
 
through the testimony of Todd, simply this.   
 
This reinstatement of Gama took place with no 
rational basis for it and in particular this aspect the 
halting, as it were, of the litigation against GMS or 
Abelose(?) [00:03:33] as it became a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, it is going to be more helpful to 
me if you start telling – if you start by telling me this is the 
allegation Mr Todd made according to the founding affidavit 
here on page – paragraph 23 that Mr Gama takes issue 
with. 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   What Mr Gama takes issue with 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so in other words, what is the 
allegation made by Mr Todd against Mr Gama in paragraph 
23 that Mr Gama takes issue with. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   He takes issue with the fact that there 
is no disclosure as to what transpired at that meeting.  
Mr Molefe is presently the subject matter of his evidence 
before the Commission.  We do not know that that aspect 
has been dealt with.  I do not think it has been raised with 
20 
him.  So my client is in the dark but this is what we say.   
 
Mr Chair, I hasten to add this.  The purpose, with 
respect, to cross-examination is not merely to elicit 
contradictions.  The purpose is to elicit to concessions, 
particularly, in circumstances where Mr Todd has created a 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 23 of 265 
 
perception.   
 
We want to disturb that inference that may flow 
from that perception having been created by means of 
cross-examining him and eliciting certain concessions.  In 
this instances I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So under paragraph 23, what you are 
saying to me is that, there is no positive allegation that 
Mr Gama relies upon which was made by Mr Todd against 
him but his issue is that Mr Todd did not include in his 
affidavit or evidence what transpired in the meeting that he 
10 
held with Mr Brian Molefe.  His issue is the fact that he did 
not say anything about the content of the discussion. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, partly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   That is partly correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   With respect.  However ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...again, I emphasise, the context with 
in which this evidence was given. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Because you see it is in the context of 
undue untoward influence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   No rational basis ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 24 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...the halting of that litigation against 
other Abelose(?) [00:06:17].  And here is the point.  If I – if 
you permit me to just finish this point Mr Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   The point, really, is this.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   What we later on learn is that there 
was good reason, there is what we call the Harris Newton 
Molobatse report that says but here are facts advanced 
10 
during our investigation which show that there was work 
performed by Abelose.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   So it is in the context of that, that we 
say:  But play your hand Mr Todd. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Tell us.  You cannot talk about things 
which we have not seen.  Which we are not a party to in 
the context, again, of you implicating our client in the so-
called undue attempt to stop the litigation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, if Mr Todd has said nothing 
about the content of the discussion and your client has 
evidence about what transpired, then his evidence would 
be unchallenged by Mr Todd. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, he does not have that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 25 of 265 
 
evidence and this is what we seek to explore in cross 
because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...if we cross Mr Todd on this point...  
Forgive me Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   If we cross him on the point and we 
establish that that at meeting Mr Molefe conveyed to him 
the reasons why this litigation was halted.  Well, then it 
flies in the face of his testimony before this Commission, 
10 
which was that there was no rational basis, at least not to 
his knowledge, for this litigation to have been haltered.  
Mr Chair, that is my respectful submission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.   
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then, is there another disputed fact 
between ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   There are number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   There are number Mr Chair.  I do not 
20 
want to waste your time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if you tell me where they are to be 
found in the founding affidavit then that would help. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I remember that you know – I was 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 26 of 265 
 
reading the founding affidavit.  I thought possible too but 
you say there is a number.  I must have.  So let us identify 
them in the founding affidavit. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Chair...  Mr Chair, it follows.  There is 
this theme that runs throughout the founding affidavit, with 
respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And it deals with these issues.  And if 
you just have regard to the very next paragraph that 
follows. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   The one which we just dealt with.  It is 
again this perception created of this undue influence 
because you will recall the testimony of Todd...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us start in the founding affidavit.  
Tell me which paragraph you ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   Paragraph 24.  It says ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   24 what?  What is the allegation it says 
Mr Todd made against him? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   To the...  I quote: 
20 
“...to the extent that Todd’s evidence creates 
the perception that I have somehow interfered 
with the influence that was drawn of the action 
against Abelose(?) [00:09:16]. 
I deny any such alleged interference and/or 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 27 of 265 
 
influence in the process...” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he is not sure ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He is not sure if Mr Todd makes that 
allegation but he says in case he does he denies it.  On 
the face of it, it seems to me that could be dealt with when 
Mr Gama gives evidence and says, well, if that is what 
Mr Todd intended to say, and I am not sure he intended to 
say that, that is not the case. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, with the greatest of respect 
10 
to the Commission.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   The purpose of cross-examination, 
again, is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You must remember that the...  In terms 
of the rules, you know, when I look at an application for 
leave to cross-examine, I must think of the work of the 
Commission and the interest of the Commission.   
 
It may be that for a particular individual it might 
be very important to cross-examine a certain witness but it 
20 
may well be that it will not advance much the work of the 
Commission in terms of its Terms of Reference.   
 
It is some point that the individual affected might 
think it is quite important for him but in the end I must look 
at the interest of the work of the Commission and that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 28 of 265 
 
interest right now also takes into account the limited time 
that we have.   
 
So if I grant leave, I must be satisfied that with 
the limited time we have, it is really appropriate, important. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, I fully appreciate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   But I simply want to make this one 
response.  It serves – it will not serve this Commission’s 
interests to have two competing versions in circumstances 
that neither of them or at least not that of Mr Todd’s has 
10 
been tested under cross but I get – I fully appreciate the 
sentiment expressed and I respect that.   
 
Mr Chair, so we go – we go further, paragraph 24 
and again the context within which there is reference to it 
and there are two separate memorandums here, but again 
and just so that we do not waste time, it is said in the 
context of my client having had a hand in this so-called 
undue influence.   
 
I want to cross-examine Mr Todd.  I want to ask 
him where is your evidence for this because you did not 
20 
disclose it then.  He says things, like, my client took 
certain steps.  What were they?   
 
You cannot give evidence-in-chief, as I term it, 
without making a full disclosure.  With respect, we ought to 
be able to test that version.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 29 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  What I will do now.  I mean, 
obviously, this is quite important for your client.  I propose 
to limit the time.  Is it fine if I give you ten minutes and I 
am not going to interrupt you much?   Ten minutes to make 
all your submissions you want to make.  Is that time fine? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   I am a long distance runner with a long 
breath but I am going to do my level best Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us try and do that.  I 
just see that it has been over, I think, 40-minutes if I am 
not mistaken. 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I have asked you questions.  So that 
has taken some time as well. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Yes.  Mr Chair, I am going to 
commence then by doing that, by having regard to 
paragraph 25.  It is an aspect that deals with condonation.  
20 
You will recall the testimony of Mr Todd, how he told you 
that he could not see, as though he was an expert witness, 
he could not see how condonation influenced the process. 
 
I say in paragraph 25: 
“You simply needed to have reference to 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 30 of 265 
 
Nkonki and KPMG’s report to understand the 
importance of...” 
 
And here is the significance.  That report served 
before the board.  That before – and because I am under 
time constraint, I am not going to read the report.  That 
report says, for instance, we have investigated, we have 
found that in the past the condonation process was 
employed.  Mr Todd says it was never employed with 
reference to procurement processes.   
 
Absolute nonsense.  The report makes it clear 
10 
that it was employed.  We want to cross-examine Mr Todd.  
We want to understand on what basis and on what 
motivated him to make that submission that it did not 
matter when the Nkonki report which was its specific 
purpose to investigate this aspect.  \ 
 
And this is crucial.  Mr Gama was not given the 
opportunity by Ms Ramos, the Group Chief Executive 
Officer, if my memory serves me correctly, at the time to 
apply for condonation.  It ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He could have initiated that.  He could 
20 
have – he was the CEO.  He could have requested it.   
ADV OLDWADGE:   My understanding of the process and 
the protocols works, you must be given leave to apply for 
condonation.  It is common cause that he was not give 
leave to apply.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 31 of 265 
 
 
And what is particularly of significance Mr Chair, 
that aspect, it would appear, is something that persuaded 
not only the chairperson of the board in the form of Mr 
Mkwanazi but also the board as a whole with one or two 
disciplines, to then find that the interest of justice, the 
probabilities – and we have regard to the Morton Rose 
report that says:  Wow, you know what, you did not allow 
this condonation process.  It proves problematic.   
 
And it was on that basis that the referral to the 
arbitration or rather the bargaining council, as it were, was 
10 
abandoned and the settlement discussions commenced 
which resulted in a settlement agreement being concluded 
between my client and Transnet as a whole.  That is not 
what you were told.  There is regard for that.   
 
If only he had read the report properly and had 
placed that before Mr Chair, it is a very different world and 
landscape.  I want to cross-examine him.  I want to ask him 
why is it that you put this set of facts and you are selective 
in what you are doing?   
 
I 
think 
it 
would 
be 
best 
served 
for 
the 
20 
Commission’s work to understand why that happened 
instead of simply mero moto accepting that the evidence of 
Mr Todd is correct because clearly it is not, with respect.  I 
hasten 
to 
move 
on. 
 
Mr 
Chair, 
time 
constraint 
...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 32 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...do not permit me to dwell too much 
on that aspect.  We have paragraph 26 of my founding 
affidavit  It refers to the report by the Deneys Reitz 
Attorneys and it is very important that I simply tell you 
what this report says Mr Chair.   
 
That there is a probability, not possibility as Mr 
Todd contended for, but probability and we know in law that 
the one has more prospects of happening than the other. 
 
The probability that the bargaining council or the 
10 
court considering the appropriateness of the sanction of 
dismissal of Mr Gama may reach the conclusion that 
dismissal 
was 
not 
appropriate 
having 
regard 
to 
the 
challenging sanction advanced by him.  That instance, the 
court may either award compensation to Gama or find a 
lesser 
sanction 
ought 
to 
have 
been 
imposed 
and 
therefore... reinstate him. 
 
It is not a thought there is no reason, no 
motivation, no rationale for his reinstatement.  To instruct a 
firm, a well-respected firm of attorneys, one of the biggest 
20 
in the country, to give you an opinion and that opinion 
leads to this conclusion.  Just like Mr Todd is a partner of 
one of the biggest law firms in this country, so was Denys 
Reitz prior to it being incorporated into Norton Rose.   
 
They 
sought 
the 
opinion, 
they 
received 
it.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 33 of 265 
 
Whether we sit today, and as Mr Todd did, he is not an 
expert witness and this is the crux of my submission.  He 
comes before you, with respect Mr Chair, and he wants to 
sit and interpret.  He was not a party to the negotiations.  
He was not a party to the advice sought and obtained. 
 
You do not come and give this sensationalised 
version:  Well, my interpretation is not that.  Let me take 
you to the next example.  You have the evidence of 
Mr Molefe in the form of a letter sent by him.   
 
You have Mr Mkwanazi.  You have Mr Makona 
10 
who says this.  Well, this interpretation that the aspect 
concerning the legal fees is not something that was 
entertained.  That is not correct.  That is Mr Todd’s 
version.   
 
His interpretation of something to which he was 
never a party.  Our version is that it did include the costs.  
Just by the way, something which ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is just a matter of interpretation 
of the settlement agreement.  Is it not? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   That is his interpretation Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  But the settlement agreement 
settled the dispute on certain terms and those terms are in 
the settlement agreement, is it not? 
ADV 
OLDWADGE: 
 
 
I, 
by 
no 
means 
– 
I 
am 
not 
...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 34 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   There might be different interpretations 
of what the agreement means. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That the ...[intervenes]  
ADV OLDWADGE:   This is our submission.  I am not a 
commercial lawyer but I can say this.  The little knowledge 
I have of commercial work is there is a thing that when you 
interpret the conduct of parties, which is contract by 
conduct, the conduct we have, Eskom paid.  I beg your 
pardon.  I am also seized there with the...  Transnet paid.   
10 
 
Mr Chair, but this is important for your purposes.  
That one million and sixteen thousand rands payment 
which Todd tells you.  It is bizarre.  There is no cause.  Let 
me tell you Mr Chair.  It is not true.   
 
That payment, following the high court order 
where my client lost his application in his bid to stop the 
proceedings, that was a payment which my client made, by 
the way.   
 
And 
when 
the 
settlement 
agreement 
was 
concluded that money was paid back to him but I am going 
20 
to continue with the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, before you sit down.  There 
is still about three minutes.  One of the things I want to 
raise with you is this.   
 
That it may well be that I should wait and not 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 35 of 265 
 
make a decision on the cross-examination application and 
let Mr Gama take the witness stand, give his side of the 
story so that – and let him be questioned by the evidence 
leader, as Mr Todd has been questioned, and see whether 
at the end of that how much is still there that really 
requires to be resolved by cross-examination because if at 
the end of his evidence it becomes quite clear that really 
there is not much in terms of dispute between them, there 
might be no need.   
 
You might not be pursue the application yourself.  
10 
So there is that is also in mind to say:  Well, Mr Todd has 
subjected himself to questioning by the evidence leaders.  
Maybe if Mr Gama did the same.  And then I have both 
sides.  The picture as to where the disputes lie might be 
clearer.  So I would like you to say something about that as 
well. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, I think, and I say this with 
respect, that is a very wise proposal by Mr Chair as to the 
future 
conduct 
of 
in 
particular 
this 
application 
is 
concerned. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   But Mr Chair will appreciate, no doubt, 
that I am creature of instruction and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...if you permit me in circumstances 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 36 of 265 
 
where I can say to this Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...my client feels very strongly about 
this application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   If I am permitted a very short 
adjournment ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   A few minutes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...to canvass this issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   It would be naughty of me not to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And return to a concession in that 
regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   If you permit me that opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   It may be a wise approach to the 
20 
matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Might we take that short ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Adjournment. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...adjournment so that I can consider it 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 37 of 265 
 
because I am not anywhere near conclusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   But I do understand that there are time 
constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, no.  That is fine.  
Mr Myburgh, is that fine with you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [No audible reply] [Microphone not 
switched on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us take a five minutes’ 
adjournment.  Just a five minutes’ adjournment. 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you Mr Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS FOR A SHORT BREAK 
INQUIRY RESUMES AFTER SHORT BREAK 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I...  We are back.   
ADV OLDWADGE:   Mr Chair, we have taken instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   We concur with the view expressed by 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And then we propose that there not be 
20 
an ultimate termination of this application until such time 
as you have suggested. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, I think that is good.  So 
we would defer the application to after he has given 
evidence and then we can take it from there. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 38 of 265 
 
ADV OLDWADGE:   There is, and I do not want to appear 
to be opportunistic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   There is potentially an application of 
sorts concerning the evidence of Mr Gama, particularly, as 
it pertains to the Fundudzi report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   But it is something that I have 
discussed with Mr Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And the suggestion very early this 
morning, as discussed between, was that we approach you 
in chambers ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...for that purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And I am simply requesting that we be 
granted that opportunity.  We will be very brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say that is an application for? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   It depends in part.  The relief is two-
20 
fold.  One that Mr Gama not be interrogated concerning the 
Fundudzi report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   But that he continues with his 
testimony. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 39 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   And that at a later stage he will be 
given an opportunity to deal with the Fundudzi report and 
he may for that purpose be recalled upon receipt of a 
further supplementary affidavit from him.  I make this 
submission before your Mr Chair in the context of this 
application 
will 
also 
be 
held 
over 
until 
that 
final 
termination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   As it were. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, okay that is fine.  I think what we 
will do is that we will defer this application.  That is one.  
Two.  I would think that we then proceed – continue with 
Mr 
Molefe’s 
evidence 
but 
at 
some 
stage 
you 
and 
Mr Myburgh could approach me about that other issue 
relating to the Fundudzi report.  At some stage.  Maybe 
later today or whatever time.  That is what I think or did 
you want to talk to me now before we continue? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   There is a measure of urgency to what 
I want to discuss ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You think so? 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...in the sense that if there is no 
compromise ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...we are going to serve our application 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 40 of 265 
 
and I do not want to do that because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   ...it is going to lead a whole new set of 
consequences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   So if we could. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   If Mr Chair will indulge us for a few 
minutes now.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV 
OLDWADGE: 
 
 
We 
would 
really, 
respectfully, 
appreciate that approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Let us do that then.  Let me 
adjourn and then the two of you can see me and then we 
will take it from there. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   I am indebted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Otherwise, this application is then 
deferred to – and will be dealt with at a later stage after 
Mr Gama has given his evidence. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   As you please Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV OLDWADGE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay we will adjourn for 
seven minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 41 of 265 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we ready to continue with Mr 
Molefe’s evidence? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, thank you, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, let us continue.  The 
affirmation you took yesterday, Mr Molefe, will continue to 
apply today. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Good morning, 
10 
Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:   Good morning.   
ADV MYBURGH:   I just want to go back a little before I go 
forward.  Yesterday we dealt with the session by McKinsey 
to Regiments, do you remember that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Was on the 16 April that Mr Sagar of 
McKinsey advised Mr Singh that McKinsey with effect from 
the 
5 
February 
ceded 
its 
rights 
and 
obligations 
to 
Regiments.  I just want to – I think you might have raised 
20 
the point with me as to whether there was anything wrong 
with that cession from McKinsey to Regiments.  I would 
just want to refer you to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh, just some 
housekeeping.  I do not propose to take another tea break, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 42 of 265 
 
to take tea break, so I propose that we proceed until one 
o’clock. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If that is fine with everybody, but if an 
urgent need does arise people will let me know. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH:     So I just want to raise one thing with 
you or show – point out one thing to you, could you please 
go to bundle 6 to the MNS report.  So this is then volume 
10 
27. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Bundle 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bundle 6, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   EXHIBIT 27. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, which page? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Page 383. 
MR MOLEFE:   382. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I just want to point out one thing to you, 
if I could ask you to look at paragraph 2.4.20.  In dealing 
20 
with that session MNS say that: 
“This cession was invalid on the basis that at the 
time when McKinsey purported to cede the contract 
McKinsey’s rights in respect of the transaction 
advisory services had lapsed.” 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 43 of 265 
 
And that is because the LOI, the letter of intent provided 
for a 90 day period and it lapsed on the 30 November.  Do 
you want to just comment on that single finding made by 
MNS? 
MR MOLEFE:   I also note that the cession was not 
approved by Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And that the cession was only approved the 
following year in April.  Sorry, in May.  The LOI was 
…[intervenes] 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Molefe, I notice that you are reading 
from something on your phone. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I do not necessarily have an objection to 
that.  Protocol would be that you would then have to share 
with us anything that you reading from that is in writing. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is my notes that I made last night. 
ADV MYBURGH:   As I say, I have no objection to that but 
the protocol is they should be shared with us. 
MR MOLEFE:   I have not made copies of these notes but 
20 
it is just handwritten notes on the form. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got a copy of the same notes? 
MR MOLEFE:   Can I use my notebook? 
CHAIRPERSON:   To do what? 
MR MOLEFE:   To read from. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 44 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you have made notes on the 
notebook. 
MR MOLEFE:   On the notebook or on the phone, it is the 
same notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you say the notes are both on the 
phone and in the notebook. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Same notes? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, then Mr Myburgh is simply 
10 
saying then if they could have copies of the notes that you 
are going to use. 
MR MOLEFE:   The copies of my – of the notes that I made 
on my notebook as I was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, as you going to rely on them in 
giving evidence. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I am just going to go …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you are not going to rely on them 
obviously you do not have to share them. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, but Chair, these notes are to remind me 
20 
exactly what is written in this document and where it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Myburgh, do you want to… 
ADV MYBURGH:   I would not like for the questioning to be 
delayed perhaps it is something that we can try and deal 
with at lunchtime. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 45 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   At lunchtime. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And if you could perhaps on that basis 
permit  Mr …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   But, Chair, if I see a section here that I 
want to refer to and then I wrote on my notebook that 
paragraph 2.4.2.1, must I then share that... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is innocuous like that, therefore 
you would not have any problem even if you were to share 
it but Mr Myburgh has requested me to allow you to look at 
them and then around lunchtime – at lunchtime there can 
10 
be a discussion, there can be a discussion about the use 
of the notes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Okay, I will not use the notes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Chair, just a simple point, I 
mean, I am just pointing out to you the finding, you can 
deal with it if you want or not.  They say that the cession 
was invalid because the LOI had expired.  It is really as 
simple as that. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes but the LOI had been renewed several 
times. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   And what I was just about to check now, 
because I did make a note about it, was in the three times, 
it was renewed three times, but I think it was also renewed 
– the MSA was then entered into at some point. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 46 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So I just wanted to check exactly when and 
how …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Molefe, just so that I capture your 
evidence, you say you dispute that point because you say 
the LOI had been extended. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I wanted to verify it for myself, Chair, 
but now if I cannot use my notes – alright, I do not dispute 
it. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright, now you do not, fine.  So let us 
10 
then go please – we added the page, remember when I 
read to you about Regiments Capital’s replacement of 
Nedbank.  I read you a letter yesterday.  Now that has 
been inserted now into bundle 5, EXHIBIT 22, your exhibit, 
could you please go there? 
MR MOLEFE:   Regiments’ letter? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Page 405.96. 
MR MOLEFE:   In bundle 5? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes.  So that would be after – right at 
the end of the file, after the CIPRO reports. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It will be 405 point? 
ADV MYBURGH:   96, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   96. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So this is the letter that I read 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 47 of 265 
 
yesterday, you see it is from Mr Singh dated the 19 
November. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And ultimately – we have been through 
this before, it is really just a matter of placing the letter 
properly on the record. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   The letter ends by Mr Singh saying: 
“This letter serves to confirm Transnet’s agreement 
to McKinsey’s request for Regiments Capital to 
10 
provide the required services in place of Nedbank.” 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Nedbank was conflicted because they 
wanted to do the funding as well and McKinsey confirmed 
that Nedbank was conflicted. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And my understanding is that Regiments 
had a choice as to who should replace Nedbank in that 
consortium and they chose Regiments of their own volition. 
ADV MYBURGH:   McKinsey chose Regiments. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Are you aware of the evidence in 
relation to Mr Sagar at McKinsey? 
MR MOLEFE:   Which part of the evidence? 
ADV MYBURGH:   That there seems, as we went through 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 48 of 265 
 
yesterday, there is a possibility that he – you can go back 
to the report, was dealing with Mr Essa. 
MR MOLEFE:   With? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Essa. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I am not aware of that. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But you confirmed that Regiments 
Capital then replaces Nedbank as per this letter. 
MR MOLEFE:   I confirmed that McKinsey then replaced 
Nedbank with Regiments. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Now …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   And that is MNS. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, we are going to come back to that.  
Now I also yesterday gave you the opportunity  to reflect 
on two memoranda overnight.  We had not dealt with the 
one but we had dealt with the first one. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Can I ask you please to go back to page 
405.1? 
MR MOLEFE:   Of which bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Of bundle 5.  405.1. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Bundle 5? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, bundle 5, page 405.1. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, Mr Molefe, just to orientate you, this 
was the memorandum that you approved, where you 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 49 of 265 
 
approved of the replacement of Letsema.  Is there anything 
that you want to, now having had the opportunity of 
studying it, is there anything that you want to say more 
than what you dealt with yesterday? 
MR MOLEFE:   You say this memorandum approves the 
appointment of Letsema? 
ADV MYBURGH:   The memorandum you see at paragraph 
1.1: 
“The Chief Executive to note that McKinsey will be 
advised to partner with another firm with equal or 
10 
better credentials than Letsema for the procurement 
elements due to potential conflict.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Letsema …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Is there anything you want to add? 
MR MOLEFE:   Letsema had a conflict. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, I know that. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because Barloworld, which was advising 
them, was also building engines for Caterpillar which 
engines were used by EMD and EMD was a bidder, so 
Letsema had a conflict.  What then happened is that 
20 
McKinsey was informed of the conflict and then asked to 
appoint somebody else instead of Letsema. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So who picked up the conflict?  Not 
McKinsey. 
MR MOLEFE:   I think it was Transnet. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 50 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, who. 
MR MOLEFE:   But the conflict was real, I am not sure who 
picked it up. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Was it you? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I say I am not sure who picked it up. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, well I am asking you, was it you? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it was not me. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So you do not have firsthand knowledge 
of this? 
MR MOLEFE:   Of the conflict. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Well, you did not pick it up but you say 
it was brought to your attention, presumably. 
MR MOLEFE:   It was brought to Transnet’s attention.  This 
conflict must have been picked in the process of receiving 
the bids or, I do not know, but they knew that EMD, EMD’s 
engines were going to be – sorry, EMD’s engines were 
Barloworld engines from Caterpillar and so EMD was 
bidding or intended to bid for the 1064 and so there was 
potential conflict and this was raised and then after it was 
raised – unfortunately, I do not have the piece of paper 
20 
where it was raised. 
ADV MYBURGH:   You see, Mr Molefe, you said something 
quite important, you said this was picked up during the 
bids and then I think you sought to correct yourself 
because of course it was not picked up because what we 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 51 of 265 
 
know, and we went through this yesterday, we know that on 
the 27 July the contract was awarded to the McKinsey 
Consortium including Letsema.  Now what we see on the 22 
of August, about a month later, is a decision in terms of 
which Letsema should be removed.  So – sorry, if I am just 
going to press you, I am going to ask you only one more 
question.  You do not know who brought this to your 
attention and you do not know why it was not picked up 
during the bids, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no, no, not during these bids. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Not during the appointment of the 
transaction adviser but after the appointment of the 
transaction adviser. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, that I know. 
MR MOLEFE:   I cannot recall how but yesterday, last 
night, I did jog my memory. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And remembered that Barloworld Engines, 
Caterpillar Engines, are used by EMD, which is an 
20 
American company and EMD was going to – had expressed 
an interest to bid for the 1064 and, as I recall, Letsema 
was in partnership with Barloworld and so it was pointed 
out actually this is a conflict, Letsema cannot advise on 
the award of the 1064 when the engines for one of the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 52 of 265 
 
bidders was coming from Barloworld. 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
 
So 
just 
that 
we 
can 
move 
on 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   So, unfortunately, because I am not at 
Transnet, I do not have access to the documents but as I 
was sitting and remembering the situation, this is what 
came to my mind and it actually just came back very 
clearly. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So I want to just confirm two facts 
before I move on, you confirm that it was something picked 
10 
up by Transnet. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright and secondly you do not know 
why it was not picked up during the bid adjudication 
process. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not why it was not picked up during the 
bid adjudication process. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And thirdly, you do not know who 
brought this to your attention. 
MR MOLEFE:   I cannot remember who brought this to my 
20 
attention. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right. 
MR MOLEFE:   But, Mr Myburgh, if you are interested you 
can certainly ask Transnet to provide information on this.  I 
am sure that there is information at Transnet. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 53 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   We can ask Mr Singh, I suppose. 
MR MOLEFE:   You can ask Mr Singh. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Can we then get to …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   But it would easier to get the documents 
from Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Can you then go to the next document 
and that you find at 105.7?  I just started dealing with this 
yesterday when you indicated that you needed more time to 
reflect on it and we then adjourned early to enable you to 
look at is.  Now I want to go through this …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   105.7 in the same bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes.  What you did confirm yesterday 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, you said 105, is that right?  
Oh, 405. 
ADV MYBURGH:   405, I beg your pardon, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, point? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Point 7  So if you could just – if I could 
take you please just to get you to confirm again what you 
dealt with yesterday.  If you go to point 15, 405.15.. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So you noted that Mr Singh had sent 
this to you on the 16 April 2014. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And we confirmed that that was the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 54 of 265 
 
same date that Mr Sagar had advised Mr Singh of the 
cession to Regiments, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 405.16? 
ADV MYBURGH:   405.15. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And yesterday you confirmed and we 
went through the documents, Mr Molefe, that that is the 
same date that Mr Sagar of McKinsey advised Mr Singh 
10 
that McKinsey had ceded its rights and obligations to 
Regiments. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, with effect from the 5 February. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes but it is exactly the same date. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So let us then go through this document, 
if we may, in more detail and let me not just go to the 
conclusion.  Now just to locate and perhaps remind the 
Chairperson the net effect of this because ultimately there 
was approval for payment to Regiments I think of an 
20 
additional R78 million in fees, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Let us go through how that came about 
and let us have a look at this …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Have you just asked me a question? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 55 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, we are going to deal with the memo 
and we will get there. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I was just going to say the correct 
terminology would be that this document is a model for the 
remuneration of the transaction advisers. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes.  Yes, it is a changed model. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, this is a new model. 
ADV MYBURGH:   It was proposed on the same day that 
McKinsey fell out with all its rights and obligations ceded 
to Regiments on the same day, correct? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  So let us then go to page 
405.7.  Now let us go through this thoroughly because it – I 
think you were right yesterday when you indicated that it is 
certainly deserving of this because of course we know that 
you approved of this.  Now let us have a look at paragraph 
1.  
“The purpose of this memorandum is to request the 
Group Chief Executive to: 
1. Note the deliverables executed by the transaction 
20 
adviser on the locomotive transaction compared 
to the original scope per letter of intent.” 
Now who is the transaction adviser there that is being 
referred to? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 56 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   405.7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have lost me or I have lost you.  
405? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Bundle 5.  Point 7, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Point 7 or 17? 
ADV MYBURGH:   7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   7, oh.   
ADV MYBURGH:   It is a memorandum to Mr Molefe from 
Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Just hang on a moment?  Do you have 
it, DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it, thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, Mr Molefe?  Who is the transaction 
adviser referred to here? 
MR MOLEFE:   I did make notes and I would request that – 
and actually they are typed out properly and I would 
request that when we get an opportunity to print them that 
we share them, but that I be allowed to refer to them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH:   I just want to make the point that this is 
something that you were asked to deal with in your 
affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:   I did.  No, not in my affidavit, yesterday.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 57 of 265 
 
Yesterday when I got these documents. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV MASUKU SC:   As I understand it, Mr Molefe does not 
have any problem with the hearing – the notes that he had 
last night for the purpose of this hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I do not know why should it be difficult 
for this hearing to accord him the opportunity to refer to 
the notes because he is prepared to share these notes with 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if he is prepared to share, is there 
any problem, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, of course not, because that was the 
whole point that I made out the outset. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I understood that Mr Molefe had decided 
he is not going to refer to his notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, initially, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   If he now wants to refer to them and 
20 
they have been typed out then perhaps it is best that we 
just get a copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Especially if it deals with this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 58 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   I am going to take Mr Molefe, though, 
and I am going to point out to him the 10.6’s that were 
mentioned to him where he in fact, to the best of my 
recollection was asked to deal with this but Chair, we are 
in hands, if you wish …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine.  You do not have 
copies, you just have notes but you tender them or 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   I have the notes and soft copy, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   My understanding is that I am here to 
assist the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And give evidence to the best of my ability. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And that is what I am trying to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And I am saying that to do that I need to 
refer to what I wrote last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I think it is resolved now. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   After the discussion that we had last time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think it is resolved. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not understand why it then becomes 
necessary to refer me back to the notices that were given 
me some time ago because …[intervenes] 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 59 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe it will be why – at the time 
that Mr Myburgh will refer you to those notices, why.  But I 
think the issue of you using notes is now resolved.  As I 
understand it, there are no copies readily made available 
but you are ready if somebody from the legal team, 
technical team, wishes to make copies then those can be 
made.   
ADV MYBURGH:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So, Mr Molefe, as I say, let us sort that 
10 
out over lunchtime, maybe the notes can be mailed to 
someone at the Commission and we will then print them 
out.  Do not have any difficulty with you referring to your 
notes if you wish to on this.  Alright?  Now but before you 
tell us what is in your notes, I am going to take you 
through this memorandum …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   But they are not – are you going to allow 
me to answer the question that …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   I want you to please answer my 
question.  Paragraph 1.1, when it refers to …[intervenes] 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   But there was a question before that. 
ADV MYBURGH:   The question is, who is the transaction 
adviser referred to in paragraph 1.1? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Who is it? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 60 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is why I wanted to refer to my notes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right. 
MR MOLEFE:   If you will allow me, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Are you able to tell us before you go 
into a long explanation who the transaction is or not? 
MR MOLEFE:   The MSA was not concluded on time. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Molefe, I am happy to allow you to 
explain yourself but are you able to tell us who the 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Chair, I am really trying to help the 
10 
Commission with information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   That I have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And if Mr Myburgh is going to interject and 
pin me into answers that are not helpful, I do not think it is 
good for the Commission, I do not think the objective of the 
Commission of arriving at the truth will be achieved. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
No, 
I 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I think Mr Myburgh must exercise some 
patience and listen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I do not think there really is a 
problem.  What he has put to you is a question that says 
do you know who the transaction advisers are that are 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 61 of 265 
 
referred to in – is paragraph 1.1, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or paragraph 1? 
ADV MYBURGH:   1.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Now it helps to start by saying yes, I 
know.  If you want to elaborate we can take it from there, 
but yes I know or no I do not [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR MOLEFE:   But give 15 seconds to say what I want to 
say. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, what …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Which is that on the 21 February the MSA 
was concluded with McKinsey, on the 21 February.  Now 
the reason this is confusing is because later on on the 16 
April McKinsey then says that no, we are ceding everything 
to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Regiments. 
MR MOLEFE:   Regiments.  And yet from the 5 February, 
and yet McKinsey had signed MSA on the 21 s t, on a date 
after it had exited the transaction exposed to a date that is 
20 
preceding.  So as I was reading this, I myself got confused 
and wondered why the legal people never picked this up.  
So the answer to Mr Myburgh’s question, I do not know, it 
is not a straightforward answer because McKinsey signed 
the MSA which made them the transaction adviser and then 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 62 of 265 
 
later on they ceded it to – they ceded the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To Regiments. 
MR MOLEFE:   The agreement to Regiments.  On that date 
that 
is 
before 
they 
signed 
so 
actually 
it 
is 
not 
a 
straightforward answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you wanted to say …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   So even as I am sitting here, I am 
confused, I do not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you wanted to say it is confusing, I 
do not know what the answer is. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not know what the answer is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because it is confusing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And even if I was going through this I was 
wondering myself but perhaps the legal people who were 
drafting these agreements and who were involved from a 
legal point of view on these matters should explain what 
really happened here because I was not even aware of this 
until I went through it last night and get proper timelines 
20 
about who did what where.  But what then happened is, I 
was – the MSA was signed by McKinsey on the 21 s t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, before the actual cession. 
MR MOLEFE:   Before the actual cession …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
the 
cession 
referred 
to 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 63 of 265 
 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   The cession was before the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The effective date. 
MR MOLEFE:   The effective date was before the date that 
they actually signed.  So I do not know actually that even 
on this day, if we had a transaction adviser because then 
on the 21 s t, when they signed, in terms of their cession, 
they were no longer the transaction adviser, so I do not 
10 
know who the transaction – it is a question that would 
require the legal people that were involved to explain. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, so the short answer is you do not 
know. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH:   When you read this – because, of 
course 
you 
approved 
this, 
a 
hugely 
important 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, after …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Sorry, do you mind if I could just finish? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   When you read this document before 
approving it, who did you think the transaction adviser was 
there? 
MR MOLEFE:   When I read ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 64 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am talking about at the time Mr 
Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   At the time yes, yes, Mr Myburgh I was 
talking about at the time, I do not think it was necessary to 
remind about that it was at the time.  That is exactly what I 
was trying to say, please do not put words into my mouth 
Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could you please just answer my 
question. 
MR MOLEFE:   Could you please allow me to answer it.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Fair enough. 
MR MOLEFE:   When I read this at the time, this was a 
model of how the transaction advisory services, I mean, 
the transaction, as I call it, the remuneration model for the 
advisors would work.  And when I read this model, it was at 
the time it was with the understanding that we have 
appointed transaction advisors, I was not aware of all this 
contract, legalities of contracts that had transpired in the 
battle. 
I thought that what was presented to me was that 
20 
we have advisors, and this is how we are going to share - 
how we going to - the remuneration of the transaction 
advisors is going to work.  So this was an approval of a 
remuneration model of the transaction advisors. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So then, at paragraph 1.2, it says: 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 65 of 265 
 
“Ratify the amendment to the allocation of scope of 
work, from McKinsey to Regiments Capital.” 
Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think we understand that content. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, and my understanding of that was that 
McKinsey as the main contractor is allocating some work 
were done by Regiment and of course that is normal in the 
context of sub-contractor.  
So I was not aware of what I had explained, I have 
10 
explained earlier, that in fact, they had been, in fact, the 
session that happened on the day that the memo was sent 
to me, as well as that it was on the fifth and that they had 
fined the MSA on a later date.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So sub-three: 
“Ratify 
the 
amendment 
in 
the 
makeup 
of 
the 
transaction 
advisor 
consortium 
from 
Nedbank 
capital to Regiments capital.” 
I think we have dealt with that.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-four: 
“Approve a change in the remuneration model of the 
transaction 
advisor 
compared 
to 
the 
original 
remuneration.” 
We have dealt with that. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 66 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sub-five: 
“Delegate power to the GCFO to give effect to the 
above budget approvals.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then if we go through the 
background…[intervene] 
MR MOLEFE:   Just to add, Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Certainly. 
MR MOLEFE:   I had no beef with those with those 
10 
intentions of the stuff. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then we get although, as I 
understand you to be saying at the time, you did not know 
of the agreements and the background. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then if we go to the 
background, it says at paragraph 2: 
“The GC - and a lot of this we have dealt with 
already, the GC approved the appointment of the 
McKinsey 
Led 
Consortium 
to 
provide 
complete 
20 
advisory services on the 1064 locomotive tender.  
The letter of intent was signed by the Group CFO 
on 4 December 2012.” 
We know that that was signed by McKinsey on the 6 t h 
4:35:2.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 67 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is how things started.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That I think we have we have gone 
through yesterday. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, and then that letter was amended 
three times. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Three: 
“A separate letter of intent was signed for Weber 
Wenzel.” 
10 
We do not need to deal with that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Four: 
“In May 2013 a potential conflict of interest was 
raised with McKinsey concerning Nedbank Capital, 
to which a response from McKinsey confirmed the 
conflict and an alternative as Regiments Capital 
was proposed.” 
We have dealt with that, correct?  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Five: 
20 
“On 19 November 2013, the Group CFO confirmed 
Transnet’s agreement to replace Nedbank Capital 
with Regiments Capital.” 
That is the letter that I showed you earlier this morning.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 68 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Six: 
“The entire scope of the engagement was allocated 
to Regiments, with McKinsey only responsible for 
the business case and limited technical optimisation 
aspects.” 
So that is the change, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, but this does not say that McKinsey is 
no longer in the picture.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, no absolutely. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is not just about the distribution of work 
10 
in the consortium.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  “But the entire scope of the  
engagement 
was 
allocated 
to 
Regiments, 
with 
McKinsey only responsible for the business case 
and limited technical optimisation aspects.” 
MR MOLEFE:   As I say this was a this was a split of the 
work in the consortium. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So then, what I want to do is to take 
up please to paragraph 10 and that you find at page 
405.12. MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It talks here under the heading value 
created by transaction advisor and then it deals with 
Regiments. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “Regiments assisted Transnet in  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 69 of 265 
 
computing the effects of hedging and escalation 
based on the original delivery schedule, compared 
to an accelerated scope revised delivery schedule. 
As well as optimising the foreign exchange hedging 
and guaranteed bond pricing.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   11: 
“This enabled Transnet to accelerate the delivery 
schedule resulting in savings in future inflation 
related escalation costs and saving in foreign 
10 
exchange hedging costs.” 
Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you could then drop down to 
paragraph 13, it deals with the allocation of locomotives 
dealt with in the previous paragraph.  
“This allocation resulted in an increase in the cost 
per locomotive due to bidders having to allocate 
more of the overhead cost to a smaller batch.” 
And then 14: 
20 
“The net saving as a result of this decision, as 
calculated by Regiments is reflected below.” 
And if you go over the page to paragraph 16, records: 
“As a result of the work done by Regiments, the 
delivery 
schedule 
was 
accelerated, 
thereby 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 70 of 265 
 
ensuring 
that 
the 
locomotives 
arrived 
earlier 
resulting 
in 
savings 
in 
future 
inflation 
related 
escalation costs and saving in foreign exchange 
hedging costs of approximately R20billion.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you say at 17 or it is 
recorded: 
“In addition Transnet through Regiments efforts 
achieved a total saving of approximately R2.8billion 
for the performance based foreign exchange and 
10 
guarantee bond.” 
Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you drop down to 
paragraph 20: 
“Regiments implemented - this under the heading 
change in remuneration model for the transaction 
advisor.” 
Then it refers to Regiments: 
“Regiments 
implemented 
extensive 
intellectual 
20 
property 
and 
complex 
techniques 
and 
methodologies to achieve the above benefits to 
Transnet, thereby mitigating the risks identified 
above.” 
Over the page paragraph 21: 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 71 of 265 
 
“The 
Regiment's 
operating 
model 
for 
such 
engagements is usually based on a risk sharing 
model or success fee, 35% of value created or 
saved.” 
Paragraph 22: 
“In this case, Regiments was transferred a mandate 
and 
remuneration 
model 
already 
accepted 
by 
McKinsey, Regiments initial indications were that 
they would have preferred to be engaged on a 
model consistent with paragraph 21.” 
10 
24: 
“This initial request was rejected.  However, based 
on the significant value created/saved, as well as 
risks mitigated as noted above, a request to amend 
the 
remuneration 
model 
was 
submitted. 
Consequently, an additional fee of R78.4million 
excluding 
VAT 
is 
recommended 
to 
Regiments 
representing 0.042% of the saving.” 
Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then under the heading triple 
PPPM, General Amendment Principles, it says: 
“Amendments in excess of 40% of the original 
contract value or contract period will be dealt with 
as follows.” 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 72 of 265 
 
Sub-one:  
“In such cases prior review and recommendation 
must be obtained from the appropriate AC first as 
well as the original signatory.  Thereafter, the 
matter be submitted for approval to the person with 
delegations one level higher than the original 
contract signatory.” 
If you have a look at Sub-two: 
“However, this rule does not apply to amendments 
falling within the GCE, BADC or Board's delegation 
10 
of authority.” 
And then at Sub-three: 
“The rules relating to contract amendments stated 
above apply to contracts awarded via open tender 
as well as those awarded by a confinement.” 
And then a 28: 
“In terms of paragraph 27.2, the content of this 
requests falls within the delegation of the GCE.” 
You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I saw it last night when I was reading 
20 
it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So that is no doubt why it was 
brought to you by Mr Singh.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Then 
we 
get 
the 
financial 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 73 of 265 
 
implications of this change.  What we know at a point is 
that the contract value was an order of R50million. We 
have seen that yesterday, and now if you take the 51 and 
you - this then deals with the change in the model, if you 
look at Regiments, initially, they were going to be due 
R21million and if one then adds this additional R78million 
one gets to 99.5. Is that right?  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it was really on that basis that 
the 
contract 
value 
increased 
from 
R51million 
to 
10 
R119million.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Through this additional payment of 
R78million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, then the budget implications. 
Although it says: 
“A tariff of 30 the additional amount was not 
explicitly budgeted for sufficient budget exists.” 
And 31: 
“The additional fee of R78.4million has not been 
20 
included in the Capital budget however, significant 
savings were achieved.” 
And 
then 
the 
recommendation 
which 
I 
took 
you 
to 
yesterday: 
“It was recommended that you should one note the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 74 of 265 
 
deliverables executed by the transaction advisor.” 
That must have referred to Regiments when we read it in 
context: 
“On the locomotive transaction compared to the 
original scope of the LOI.” 
And as has been mentioned, that had been transferred to 
Regiments, and then three: 
“Ratify 
the 
amendment 
in 
the 
makeup 
of 
the 
transaction 
advisor 
consortium 
from 
Nedbank 
Capital 
with 
Regiments 
Capital 
for 
approve 
a 
10 
change in the remuneration model of the transaction 
advisor 
compared 
to 
the 
original 
remuneration 
model, and delegate power then to the GCFO to 
give effect to the above approvals.” 
So I think you summarised it well, earlier. I mean, really, 
what this memorandum captures, is a change in the 
remuneration model, applicable to Regiments, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:    However, I am not sure if you understand 
Mr Myburgh that what this memo actually says is that for 
reason stated in the memo, Regiments managed to save us 
20 
when R2.8billion. So they made - they saved us R2.8billion 
at Transnet and for the bringing into the kitty R2.8billion, it 
was 
being 
recommended 
that 
they 
should 
be 
paid 
R78million for the R2.8billion that they had put in.  
And the memo says that, well, it is not possible to 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 75 of 265 
 
pay 
them 
the 
R78million, 
because 
the 
original 
remuneration model does not allow it.  This is despite the 
fact that Regiment had protested in the beginning, that 
they prefer to be remunerated on a different base, and now 
Regiment was coming back and saying, guys, I have 
already saved you R2.8billion.  So please, can you 
reconsider the remuneration model that would effectively 
allow me to be paid another R78million and what I simply 
did, I looked at the situation, I thought R2.8billion is not 
bad for R78million, and I approved it, that is in English, 
10 
that is what happened. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No then I think that you and then 
see eye to eye on this. I mean, effectively, the change in 
remuneration model, you are right, the original model 
would not have allowed this, but you reflected on the 
saving, and you agreed to change the model, and therefore 
agreed to pay them the R78million for R2.8billion. But and 
we are going to come to the technical aspects and of 
course, you did not have to do this. 
MR MOLEFE:    Chairperson, I did not have to but one of 
20 
the things that was uppermost in my mind was that if these 
people have done what they say they have done, and they 
have saved us, R2.8billion you really have to incentivise 
them to do more, because by refusing, they will just stick 
to what – to doing what they get paid to doing.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 76 of 265 
 
And that is not necessarily in the interest of the 
company.  So it is a well-known principle in business, that 
remuneration should be linked to the benefits to the 
company. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But that was not the original model 
and have a look at paragraph 22…[intervene] 
MR MOLEFE:    No, the original model did not anticipate 
the situation.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I can just ask you to go to 
paragraph 22, just so that we understand and I will then 
10 
engage with you, paragraph 22 in this case: 
“Regiments 
was 
transferred 
a 
mandate 
and 
remuneration model already accepted by McKinsey.” 
So I think it is common cause then that that model did not 
provide for this, but because of the saving you agreed to 
change it in plain English as you say.  
MR MOLEFE:    Yes, because of the R2.8billion that was 
on the table, or whether or not I mean, R2.8billion that is 
purported to be on the table I was prepared to reconsider 
and say, well, if these people are performing so well, we 
20 
should 
consider 
paying 
them 
R78million 
out 
of 
the 
R2.8billion. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you accept that you did not have 
to do that it was quite generous. 
MR MOLEFE:    No, we did not have to. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 77 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So it was generous of you. 
MR MOLEFE:    But we could. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but I am saying it was generous 
of you.  I mean, you could have said, I am just holding you 
to the comment there was no - Mr Molefe there was nothing 
in law that was compelling you to do this. 
MR MOLEFE:    Mr Myburgh I am telling you, that the 
reason I did it, I did not do it, because I like Regiment.  I 
did not do it, because I have a particular dislike for 
anybody 
or 
whatever. 
 
I 
did 
it 
because 
there 
was 
10 
R2.8billion on the table.  
I do not know if you understand what R2.8billion 
means, for a company like Transnet, which made in 2016, a 
net profit after tax of R4billion. It was not insignificant and 
I think for R78million, I felt that this could be done.  This is 
a decision that would typically be taken by a CEO in my 
position.  This was nothing out of line, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, well, do you know what 
happened to half of this money? 
MR MOLEFE:    I do not know.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, you do. 
MR MOLEFE:    Hey? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You do know what happened to half 
of the money Mr Molefe, that is the issue. 
MR MOLEFE:    Did you say I do? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 78 of 265 
 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
from 
what 
you 
heard 
yesterday, you have a sense of what happened to half of 
this money? 
MR MOLEFE:    No, I do not know what happened to half of 
the money.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it was paid to Mr Essa.  
MR MOLEFE:    I did not know that at the time, even now I 
do not know it other than the fact that you said it.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You see, that is why this is placed 
under scrutiny because you I think, have accepted that this 
10 
was generous.  You did not have to in law do this, you 
decided for business reasons to do it on your own. 
MR MOLEFE:    I think your question Mr Myburgh would be 
fair, if it was, had you known that half of this money would 
go to Mr Essa, would you have taken the decision?  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what is the answer to that? 
MR MOLEFE:    And the answer might be different, I do not 
know what I would have thought at the time and I do not 
want to speculate on it.  But that is not what was on the 
table at the time, we were confronting objective facts, and 
20 
the objective facts are that there was R2.8billion on the 
table.  
The people were asking to be remunerated for it 
and I thought that for all purposes of ensuring that in 
future, 
we 
can 
even 
have 
more 
savings 
if we 
can 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 79 of 265 
 
encourage them to do these structures that they did, we 
should pay them R78million, what you came up with 
yesterday and what has come up in this Commission are 
things that were not in my knowledge at the time, 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I think that that as you know 
is…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Because now you want to think, you 
want to say that I was paying R78million or half of it to Mr 
Essa and that is not true, I deny that in the strongest 
possible terms.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I understand that but what you can 
understand 
why 
this 
contract 
is 
being 
placed 
under 
scrutiny, and of course, whether or not you knew what Mr 
Essa was up to you really needs to be decided when it has 
gone through all the facts one cannot deal with it now. 
MR MOLEFE:    Just to Mr Myburgh I actually did not know 
Me Essa. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But we have been through that Mr 
Molefe, you did not know him but you had a seat at the 
table at the Gupta’s…[intervene] 
20 
MR MOLEFE:    Ja, but you are saying that money was 
paid to Mr Essa I did not even know who Mr Essa is. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And they were the beneficiaries of 
this money laundering, he was their money laundering, 
Lieutenant you knew them that is the problem.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 80 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:    No, I knew when, where do you get the 
evidence that I knew?  I mean, is it evidence that has been 
presented to the Commission or is it your own evidence 
that I knew?  Where do you get it, so why do you make 
such a wild irresponsible accusation? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I said, you knew…[intervene] 
MR MOLEFE:    No, you cannot say that I knew that they 
were going to use it for money laundering unless you are 
a…[intervene] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Let me just retrace my steps if you 
10 
do not mind. 
MR MOLEFE:    Which doctor?  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Molefe, I was trying to explain in 
fairness to you why one needs to from the Commission’s 
perspective, place this memorandum under scrutiny, just 
bear with me. 
MR MOLEFE:    I do not mind what you going to – what you 
are trying to explain.  I take exception to the fact that you 
say that I knew. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, that is not what I said. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:    What did you say, I mean? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I said…[intervene] 
MR MOLEFE:    Maybe we should ask for the record to be 
read again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, him say what he said and let us 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 81 of 265 
 
take it from there. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
I 
think 
the 
point 
that 
you 
made…[intervene] 
ADVOCATE FOR MOLEFE:    Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADVOCATE FOR MOLEFE:    Chairperson, the record will 
reflect that, Chairperson he said he knew. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but let us hear what he says.  He 
said, because I do not know whether he completed his 
sentence before Mr Molefe…[intervene] 
10 
MR MOLEFE:    No, he said you knew what was happening.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  One, if we need to 
check the record, it can be checked but let us here what Mr 
Myburgh says he said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I would really like to cut 
through this, I mean, as far as you concerned, you did not 
know. 
MR MOLEFE:    Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and what I was trying to get 
at is when I referred to Mr Essa, you said you did not know 
20 
him.  I then pointed out to you that you actually knew the 
Gupta’s, that is where I am going to, but if you say you did 
not know this, that answer must be accepted, now, let us 
move on from this document.  
But I am going to come back to the issue, ultimately 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 82 of 265 
 
and I told you right up front, that ultimately whether you 
knew or not, and I am sure you must accept, must be 
determined once one's gone through all of the evidence, 
and then you look back on it, not one single thing would be 
determinative of that question. 
MR MOLEFE:    Yes, but I hope Chairperson that we are 
not 
in 
this 
commission 
to 
entertain 
Mr 
Myburgh’s 
preconceived conspiracy theories.  I hope that we are here 
to listen to objective evidence that is not tainted by what 
Mr Myburgh may have read in the newspapers, may have 
10 
read in other affidavits and so.  I am not here to answer 
what is in Mr Myburgh’s head or to confirm his conspiracy 
theory.   
I am here to give evidence and my objective 
evidence is, I have approved this because there was 
R2.8billion on the table, and that I did not know that Mr 
Essa was involved.  There is nowhere in this document that 
says that this money will go to Mr Essa.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no Mr Molefe that is fine but 
remember what I said, I think yesterday, that each witness 
20 
comes and gives answers to questions that the Evidence 
Leader is not obliged to, at this age necessarily accept 
that as true.  He is entitled to probe further, to test it if he 
thinks it should be tested, as long as you are given a 
chance to deal with what he puts to you to try and test it.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 83 of 265 
 
So he mentioned yesterday, if I recall correctly, that 
one of the issues as he sees them, in regard to your 
evidence or your role, will be whether despite the fact that 
you had a certain relationship with Mr Ajay Gupta or the 
Gupta family.  The position is that you might not have 
known 
of 
certain 
things 
that 
the 
Gupta’s 
and 
their 
associates may have done in relation to Transnet or 
whether you knew, and therefore you may have been 
complicit, or it was a question of negligence.  
And then I think he said, or whether the question is 
10 
whether they were too smart for you to pick up what they 
may have been doing.  So when he was putting this to you, 
he wanted to make sure that as he puts questions as we go 
further, you know that these are the things his trying to 
deal with so that you can answer knowing the context, you 
know.  
So that in the end, if I ask him the question when 
he makes his submissions or presents argument at the end, 
if I asked the question on this evidence, can it be said that 
Mr Molefe knew what the Gupta’s or their associates were 
20 
doing?  He can say, I put these questions to him, or he 
gave these answers and I did not just accept that I probed 
further, and these were his answers.   
Based on his answers, my submission is that he 
knew, or my submission that he did not know.  So that is 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 84 of 265 
 
what he is trying to do. 
MR MOLEFE:    Chair, my evidence is that I did not know, 
in the interest of progress let us move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Can I just once more, just put it on 
record so that if it is possible, we can be able to move on.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Mr Molefe has already said yesterday 
10 
and today.  He has never met Mr Essa, he does not know 
Mr Essa.  So, whatever Mr Myburgh may be having against 
Mr Essa cannot in any way be imputed to Mr Molefe, that is 
number one.  
Number two, Chair I want to request that the Mr 
Molefe should be given an opportunity to testify freely in 
this Commission, he should not be interrogated and we 
have observed this from yesterday.   
Firstly, he was patronised on a few occasions and 
he had to bring this to the attention of the Commission.  
20 
And secondly, it is as if his in an interrogation 
room, I thought the purpose of this proceedings is to get 
information and the witness should be able to do so freely, 
he should not be harassed when he has to give answers in 
this Commission, that is our request. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 85 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well, let me say this you will have 
noticed that in terms of the rules of the Commission, there 
is a rule that says the Evidence Leader is entitled to ask 
questions to get to the truth of the allegations or the 
evidence.  
So you say he should not be interrogated but what I 
am sure you agree is that when he gives evidence as it 
should happen with all witnesses, if the Evidence Leader 
wishes to probe further, to test the veracity of that 
evidence, the Evidence Leader should be entitled to do 
10 
that, as long as Mr Molefe as a witness is given a chance 
to respond to that, what would not be right is not to give 
him a chance to respond to it. 
MR MOLEFE:    Chairperson, I agree, but I do not 
think…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, let me deal with one, 
when I deal with your counsel, let me deal with your 
counsel, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   No, that is clear Chairperson as long 
as ultimately Mr Molefe is not going to feel intimidated. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But how questions are also posed to 
him is very important, because if he feels attacked, then he 
is going to respond in a particular way and I think we need 
to get to that point. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 86 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I think we all appreciate that we 
want to make sure there is fairness but we want to make 
sure that there is proper understanding of what the 
evidence is and the way it needs to be tested, it is tested, 
but there must be fairness throughout.  Okay, alright.  Your 
counsel spoke, Mr Molefe do you - you look like you want 
to say something. 
MR MOLEFE:    No, I did not want to say something Chair, 
no, I did not want to say anything Chair I accept what my 
counsel said, we can lay the matter to rest as long as we 
10 
remember that my understanding is that this is not an 
accusatorial hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:    It is here to extract information to get to 
the truth.  Now the moment we start pointing fingers and 
said you knew despite the fact that I say I did not, I think it 
is problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you understand what I said earlier 
on about the probing and so on? 
MR MOLEFE:    Yes, no I understand Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Mr Molefe could I ask 
you please to go to the MNS Report, bundle 6, exhibit 
BB27 and could you please turn to page…[intervene] 
MR MOLEFE:    Which page number? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 87 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   385. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It says and I direct your attention 
towards the foot of the page paragraph 2.5.9. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Surprisingly on 16 April 2014 Mr Singh 
wrote a memorandum to Mr Molefe to approve a change in 
the remuneration model of Regiments and that Transnet pay 
Regiments an amount of R78 million.  You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We dealt with that.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry did you say 8385? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  385. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe I suppose there is one thing 
I have not finalised. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh I – are we done with that paragraph? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No I am going to come to that if I could 
just ask you to confirm.  You signed the memorandum you 
received from Mr Singh the next day? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  On the 17t h of April. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes do you want to comment on 259? 
MR MOLEFE:  It does not have the context that I put here. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 88 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes sure. 
MR MOLEFE:  To say that the R78.4 million was in 
recognition of the fact that they had saved us R2.8 billion.  
So the R78.4 million on its own make it like this – looks like 
a lot of money, it looks like unreasonable and it would 
surprise people with an untrained eye like MNS but if they 
had put it in context it might have not surprised me at all.  
So that is the comment that I want to make that this is 
actually misleading because it does not put everything into 
context.   
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What MNS then do at paragraph 2.5.10 
and 2.5.11 is they essentially summarised the memorandum 
we need not deal with that. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But could I ask you please then to go 
to 2.5.13 you have confirmed that on the 17t h you approved 
that request. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct?  And then what they refer to 
is a memorandum from Mr Edward Thomas.  Do you know 
20 
who he was? 
MR MOLEFE:  No I do not know who he was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I understand that at a time he was the 
Chief Procurement Officer. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 89 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Might he have been? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, yes I do not remember meeting him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And it talks about a memorandum of 
his dated the 23 rd of April and this is what he said at 
paragraph 11 from the memo. 
“The benefits that Transnet obtained from the transaction 
although is a contract was as a result of the contracted or 
deliverables being provided in terms of the current fixed fee 
agreement Transnet has with the service provider. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So in other words he is saying well 
that is what you contracted for. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then goes on to say: 
“The fact that Regiments Capital operating 
model is based on a risk share model or 
success fee is irrelevant Regiments Capital 
willingly accepted the rights and obligations 
of the existing contract whose fees is fixed 
fee 
for 
the 
delivery 
of 
deliverables.  
20 
Regiments also agreed to an increased fixed 
fee for the detailed deliverables that they 
delivered on.” 
Next paragraph. 
“Based on the above notwithstanding the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 90 of 265 
 
GCE’s approval we do not agree to the 
implementation 
of 
the 
change 
in 
the 
remuneration model as the service provider 
has been sufficiently remunerated for the 
services provided as per the agreement.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Myburgh I do not why – I do not know why 
you choose to leave out what is in the MNS Report about Mr 
Thomas when he said that he wrote on the 24t h of April a 
memorandum objecting to the revenue sharing model.  He 
10 
wrote a memorandum which you are now referring to.   
 
But in the MNS Report MNS says: 
“Mr Thomas says that memorandum he could 
not confirm that that memorandum did reach 
Mr Molefe’s office.” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am coming to that now Mr Molefe. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
No 
but 
Mr 
– 
Mr 
Thomas 
says 
the 
memorandum did not reach me.  In fact he says he – it never 
reached Mr Singh or myself.  So yes he wrote that 
memorandum and in fact maybe if I had seen it at the time I 
20 
may have reconsidered the decision that I had taken.  But 
the fact of the matter is that I do not know why you are – you 
are leaving paragraph 25 – 2.5.15 of the MNS Report where 
he says Mr E Thomas could not confirm whether Mr G Peter 
shared the memorandum with Mr A Singh and Mr B Molefe. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 91 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And I was going to come to that Mr 
Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  No sorry I was under the impression that you 
just ignoring it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why – Why? 
MR MOLEFE:  I thought you are sweeping it under the 
carpet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So let us – no of course not but let us 
first deal with the sentiment expressed.  I am so – I accept it 
records you did not get it but I… 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  No – I would – I would prefer not to comment 
on Mr …. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  Thomas’ memorandum because it is a 
memorandum that never reached me that I did not have at 
the time a fair chance to consider.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But what about the proposition that I 
want to put to you that it was part of the deliverables that 
they had contracted for.  That is what he is saying. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the representations. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
That 
had 
been 
made 
to 
me 
in 
the 
memorandum of the revenue sharing of the remuneration 
was that there had been savings of R2.8 billion and that 
those savings were not – were over and above what was 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 92 of 265 
 
required to be done.   
 
So if you say to me that the – well that was part of 
the deliverables then you are then suggesting that those 
representations to me were misrepresentations which at the 
time is not something I was not doubting anybody’s bona 
fide’s at the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  If I then take you to the next 
paragraph and you are quite right in an interview with Mr 
Thomas he confirmed that he had drafted a memorandum to 
Mr Gary Peter objecting to Regiments payment on a risk 
10 
shared basis however Mr Thomas could not confirm whether 
Mr Peter shared the memorandum with Mr Singh or Mr 
Molefe.  As I understand your evidence. 
MR MOLEFE:  I would have preferred that you start there.  
To say that Mr Thomas did write the memo but that memo did 
not go anywhere and that for whatever reasons it did not go 
anywhere.  It never came to the attention of Mr Molefe 
however Mr Thomas feels that the payment was not 
necessary. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And what is your view of that 
20 
now seeing this – seeing the concern that he raised? 
MR MOLEFE:  No Chairperson I can only talk about what 
happened at the time.  What I feel now I mean I feel that 
perhaps if I had seen Mr Thomas’ memorandum I may have 
reconsidered but I did not. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 93 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  And the objective facts are that I did not and 
that I at the time was convinced that the payment R70.8.4 
million was justified. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Who was – what position did Mr Peter 
occupy at this time? 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Peter was very senior more senior than Mr 
– I suspect Mr Peter was Mr Thomas’ boss, yes Mr Peter was 
in the finance department I think not responsible for 
procurement but responsible for I cannot remember the 
10 
terminology now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Treasury? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not Treasury. 
MR MOLEFE:  I remember now – Supply Chain – no I am not 
sure but he was – he was in the procurement space.  He put 
together the procurement transactions. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And if Mr Thomas had written this 
memorandum to him would you have expected Mr Peter to 
provide you with the memorandum? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Well it depends on what – to who the 
memorandum was addressed.  If it was addressed to me by 
Mr Thomas with the intention that it should go through the 
different levels until it reaches me I would have expected it 
to reach me.  But if it was a memorandum that he just 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 94 of 265 
 
addressed to Mr Peter then – then perhaps the fact that it 
did not reach me should not surprise anyone. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  I am not sure who was it that it 
was addressed to? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon? 
MR MOLEFE:  Who was it addressed to? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I can find out for you. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  On the reading of it it seems to me it 
was addressed to Mr Peter. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So as I understand what your evidence 
is is that if it was one of those multilevel. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Memos it would have got to you but 
otherwise as I understand your evidence correct me if I am 
wrong it would have been up to Mr Peter to decide that. 
MR MOLEFE:  The way the system works – worked if Mr 
Thomas wanted to bring anything to my attention he had to 
write a memo to Mr Molefe and at the bottom say that the – I 
20 
have compiled this memo and these are the issue in the 
memo recommendation and so on.  It would go to his boss.  
If the boss was not obliged to agree with him but he was 
obliged to pass it on to Mr Singh and then to myself and so it 
would arrive at me with memo compiled by Mr Thomas not 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 95 of 265 
 
recommended by Mr Peter, not recommended by Mr Singh 
but nevertheless brought to me for my attention it was 
addressed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And then if we just carry on 
there is just I think two other points I want to look at.  2.5.16 
on 24 April 2014 Transnet and Regiments concluded the first 
addendum to the MSA which provided for a fixed fee of the 
R78 million.  Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Now that adds to the confusion of who 
signed the MSA that I referred to earlier which is a legal 
10 
conundrum that has now just come to my attention. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because now Transnet and Regiments 
conclude an addendum to the MSA and yet the evidence was 
on – I MNS Report that the MSA was signed by – by 
McKinsey after signing it to 00:10:52 transaction on a date 
after signing.  So the – really my question I am really also 
flabbergasted now about how this could have passed through 
a legal department because all the agreements that we were 
entering into there was a standard operating procedure that 
20 
they had to be vetted by the legal department. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And what we do know… 
MR MOLEFE:  And – and can I tell you something also. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That also flabbergasts me genuinely is that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 96 of 265 
 
when payments other – for example the payment of that 
R78.4 million the finance division before they make a 
payment they have to see the agreement on which the 
payment is based.  So my question then on reading this was 
so what was used?  And those things were outside of my 
knowledge Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. Well it is those very points that 
you raised that obviously also things that concern the 
commission but we need not go through all of that.  If I could 
just direct your attention to paragraph 2.5 18 or just ask you 
10 
to confirm that on the 30t h of April Regiments was then paid 
the R79 million. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you might then have seen at 
paragraph 2.5.20 that MNS having investigated the matter 
found that there were in fact no savings that Regiments 
secured for Transnet.   
MR MOLEFE:  Well that is news to me because as I say at 
the time of signing that memorandum I did not trust the bona 
fide – I did – I did not question the bona fide’s.  There was 
20 
nothing that would have made me to be suspicious that this 
is indeed not the case what has been represented. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course if any service provider says to 
you please let us revise my remuneration package or let us 
revise how much you are going to pay me because I have 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 97 of 265 
 
saved you so much. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you agree to the revision you would 
need to satisfy yourself that the statement that they have 
saved you so much is factually correct. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So are you saying that in this 
particular case you – you did not do that.  You accepted their 
word or not really? 
MR MOLEFE:  No it was recommended internally. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  So the people that had engaged with the 
service providers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Then sent it to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That everything is fine.  However – however 
this statement of MNS may be disputed as well.  Perhaps 
when they come here they will say we do not agree with MNS 
that this was indeed the case and they will say that there 
20 
were seen.  All I am saying is the representation that was 
made to me was that there were savings and I had – and I 
trusted the bona fide’s of my – the people that I worked with 
– my colleagues that this is in fact the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you did not say to them I guess that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 98 of 265 
 
flows from your evidence that you accepted their bona fide’s.  
You did not say to them you know this is a huge saving you 
talking about.  Is it R2, something billion? 
MR MOLEFE:  R2.8 billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Keep saving please come and show 
me how that has come about you need to go that far. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I did not Chair.  You know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  We were – my attitude was when you are a 
Group Chief Executive of a company they have to trust your 
10 
colleagues – you have to trust your subordinates.  So if they 
tell you that it is raining outside you do not take out your 
hands through the window and check if it is raining. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  And – and unless that trust is broken at some 
point but I remember in team building there was an exercise 
that we used to do where we all hold hands in one line and 
everybody is blindfolded except the people – the person in 
front so you have to trust that person even if walking in 
water.  But you have to say okay he can see I cannot see 
20 
and that is how it works because in a sense from where I see 
it this was not the only issue that I was dealing with and I 
had to trust the people that were giving me information on 
this particular issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My Myburgh. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 99 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Just so that I understand it 
when you say you trusted your colleagues it was – are you 
referring here to Mr Singh? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I mean there was no one else. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you when you received this 
memorandum did you engage with Mr Singh? 
MR MOLEFE:  I think we may have had a discussion one on 
one where I asked him to take me through the memorandum 
10 
and explain to me what it is about and he did and that I was 
(inaudible). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You may have? 
MR MOLEFE:  I may have yes but that is not recorded 
anywhere and – but I seem to recall that we did that.  That I 
said Anoj what is this about?  And then he came into my 
office and said explain – took me through the memorandum 
point by point and said they have saved us R2.8 billion and 
then … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In the process of doing that did he 
20 
indicate to you when the McKinsey MSA was signed. 
MR MOLEFE:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And there was a session. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I do not remember. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he bring all that to your attention? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 100 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  When they discussed – the discussion I just 
wanted to understand why we are paying Regiments R78 
million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So let us go back to the MNS memo 
and just I do not know if you know this.  You know that Mr 
Sedumeni you know the author of this – when I say memo 
the report has testified in the commission. 
MR MOLEFE:  Who? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Sedumeni. 
MR MOLEFE:  Sedumeni. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja you know that he has testified? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes he has testified. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I was forced to take both the report and 
as well as their testimony here with – with just a little bit 
more than a tablespoon of salt when it emerged in the press 
that in fact they were possibly involved in a bribe as MNS 
and although the press ombudsman had ruled that there was 
no substance to the allegation the press ombudsman did 
publish a conversation between one of their partners and 
20 
somebody at Transnet where they were really – were talking 
about the payment of – of what appeared to be a bribe.  And 
so – and so even – even now when I read this report I – I 
read it in that context that these were possibly people that 
were not objective. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 101 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Aright.  If we go back to paragraph 
2.5.20 there were no savings that Regiment secured with 
Transnet in that one.  JP Morgan hedged the financial risk 
which Regiment purports it arrived.  A significant savings for 
Transnet too.  Idea to transfer the FX risk to the balance 
sheet of the surprise came from Transnet and not Regiments 
and three the performance guarantees did not result in 
savings due to the small amounts used and the majority of 
the bonds were market related.  I – as I understand it you 
say you did not – none of it.  Or perhaps I could just ask you 
10 
to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I cannot comment on that – perhaps the 
people that had written the memo that has an opposing view 
to this if they come here perhaps they will give evidence to 
the extent that this is not correct.  But like I said coming 
from MNS tablespoon of salt. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You, yourself do not know whether that 
saving was effected as I understand your evidence. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I know it to the extent that it was 
represented to me. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It was told to you yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I understand that answer to be saying 
you – you do not know as a matter of fact but you were told 
by somebody you trusted that there were such savings and 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 102 of 265 
 
you accepted that. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  And over and above that Chair I trusted that 
we have quite a robust internal audit and what I considered 
to be a robust legal department and that it was not possible 
for something like this to land up on my desk that was not – 
that was not correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well I just wanted to ask you I mean 
you see that on this memorandum there are not various 
10 
levels of authority and Mr Singh is writing directly to you. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what was my understanding of you 
evidence correct that you did not ever have an occasion to 
question Mr Singh’s trustworthiness? 
MR MOLEFE:  No.  No.  It could have been drafted by 
somebody from Mr Singh that did not put their name.  There 
– it did not reflect that it had been recommended by anyone 
20 
else but the fact that Mr Singh had recommended it was 
sufficient for me.  In any way if it came to me with Mr Singh’s 
recommendation and that is what I looked at. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So we started out yesterday dealing 
with the procurement of consulting and advisory services and 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 103 of 265 
 
so far what we have been dealing with really is the 1064 
revisory contract. 
MR MOLEFE:  Hm. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I want to change to another topic albeit 
related but it the next contract that I want to look at and that 
is the China Development Bank loan. 
MR MOLEFE:  CDB loan yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now let me perhaps just summarise Mr 
Molefe the – the – some of the evidence that I can get you to 
the point where you and I can engage one another about 
10 
what I would like to ask.   
 
What the evidence shows is that after the 1064 
locomotive contract was awarded to the four OME’s Transnet 
of course knew this. 
MR MOLEFE:  OEM’s. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh yes I beg your pardon.  Transnet 
needed 
to 
secure 
funding 
for 
this 
about 
R50 
billion 
expenditure. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the two Chinese bidders CSR and 
20 
CNR they had included letters of funding support from the 
Chinese Development Bank and that is what brings me to 
this topic.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Ms Makgatho she was –  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 104 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  No Makgatho 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Makgatho. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She was your head of Treasury is that 
right? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She gave evidence about a trip that 
she took to Beijing with Mr Singh in July of 2014 to meet the 
Chinese Development Bank and she went on to testify that 
upon 
her 
return 
from 
Europe 
where 
she 
did 
some 
10 
international travelling there at the end of July 2014 her 
evidence was that she was shocked to find out that 
Regiments were – were on the scene and negotiating with 
China Development Bank. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is the rough background. 
MR MOLEFE:  Were in China? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No when she came back. 
MR MOLEFE:  When she was in – oh when she returned yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that then brings us to the 4t h of 
20 
August 2014 when she sent you a memorandum. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Setting out her concerns. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps I could take you to that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 105 of 265 
 
memorandum and let me take you please to – just give me a 
second?  Could I ask you please to fish out Exhibit BB10(a)? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I ask you please to turn to page 
31 NEM31?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So at paragraph 126 she talks about 
returning from Europe and she was shocked to find out that 
the CDB was now communicating directly with Regiments 
and that Eric Wood was leading the negotiations.  And this 
10 
was in parallel to Transnet furthering negotiations with the 
CBD.  I just want to then take you to paragraph 127 over the 
page. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She said: 
“I then complained bitterly to both Anoj Singh 
and Brian Molefe because I believed there 
was not need to use Regiments because of 
our internal Treasury capacity.” 
She refers there to an Annexure MM6 that you find at page 
20 
MEM75.  Do you want to go there? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And do you accept that you received 
that email from her on the 4t h of August? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 106 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  She goes onto say in her 
affidavit at paragraph 131 this is at page MEM33. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That you organised a meeting between 
Transnet and Regiments to resolve the CDB pricing proposal 
impasse and that meeting was held she says at the Melrose 
Arch Hotel.  Transnet was represented by Mr Singh and 
yourself and herself and Regiments by Eric Wood and Niven 
Pillay.  You confirm that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She says that:   
“Brian Molefe suggested that as everyone 
seemed to think that my pricing indication is 
off the mark and the one that Eric Wood 
received from Nedbank seems reasonable I 
should agree with them as I was the only one 
who did not agree.  I told Brian Molefe that 
my position has not changed and will not 
change as the CDB facility is expensive and 
not worth it.” 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you want to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Again Mr Myburgh you started the story right 
in the middle and went to the end to paint a particular 
picture.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 107 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You stuck in the middle did you say? 
MR MOLEFE:  You started it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh I beg your pardon. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  I do not know for what end but the story 
is that there was ongoing disagreements between Mathane 
Makgatho and Anoj Singh.  Mathane Makgatho and I had 
worked at the Treasury.  She reported to me at the Treasury 
when I was a Deputy Director General Assets and Liability 
Management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say she reported to you at National 
10 
Treasury? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  When I was Deputy Director General Assets 
and Liability Management she was Chief Director responsible 
for foreign funding.  I have huge respect and knowledge of 
the international capital market as well as risk management 
and structure and the bond market.  She – her knowledge is 
very superior.  She came to me to complain before this 
incident about two times about Eric Wood and Anoj Singh 
20 
and their proposal.  And on both occasions I said to her okay 
I hear you I will deal with it.  And on both occasions I 
followed her advice.  I did not do what Anoj Singh and Eric 
Wood had been proposing,  but when it came to this, there 
was a big debate.  I saw Mathane separately and I saw 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 108 of 265 
 
Anoj separately.  And they both presented their cases.  
Chair, when you are doing a transaction like this, there are 
numerous views about how to approach it.  And Mathane 
had a view, Anoj had a view.  And Anoj... 
 
The advisors that were advising Anoj on the 
transaction with Eric Wood and Neville Pillay.  And my 
feeling about that was that... thousand ideas... let us get 
more ideas.  There is no harm in getting different 
perspectives.  And Matane disagreed...   
 
And instead of just dismissing what she was 
10 
saying.  I called a meeting which happened – to have 
happened at Melrose Arch.  I said to her:  Let us go to a 
meeting...  And let us have a debate on this one, right?   
 
So there was a debate, as she correctly pointed 
out but they were feeling – they felt that what they were 
presenting would be the best solution and in the debate 
she could not sway them to agree to her position.   
 
I, 
actually, 
understood 
her 
position 
and 
sympathised with her position but I then said at the end of 
the meeting:  Matane, since you are the only one holding 
20 
this position – because I excluded myself because I wanted 
to be... – since you are the only one ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You wanted to be a like a judge. 
MR MOLEFE:   I wanted to be like...  I wanted to be like 
you. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 109 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR MOLEFE:   [laughs]  Since you are the only one who is 
holding this position.  Are you prepared to say their 
position which is held by these three is something that you 
could go along with?   
 
She said:  No, I will not do it.  I will not agree to 
it.  I did not say you must go with it.  I said would you be 
prepared to consider going along with this idea that they 
are proposing?  And she said no.   
 
Chairperson, and after she said no because I 
10 
respected her immensely and I never implemented it 
despite the fact that the three gentlemen had opposition.  I 
never implemented it.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then, what we know at 
paragraph 133 is that after that Melrose Arch meeting, she 
then sent you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You are referring to what 
paragraph? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 133. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At MM...  Sorry, MEM-33.  Are you 
there Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   She said she sent you a further 
email.  Perhaps you can go to that? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 110 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is page 240. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am not going to take you through 
this but she put forward her position in some detail, 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And in fact, in the first introductory 
paragraph after “I trust that you are well...”, et cetera.  It 
says: 
10 
“For the avoidance of doubt, I will bring the 
following to your attention...” 
 
And then she sought to emphasise points under 
the heading Overall Governance ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
...Fees, 
Interest, 
Expenses 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...Once-off Arrangement fee.  Which, 
of course, there was a fee to be paid for this.  That fee 
20 
would go to Regiments.  And then under the heading 
Conclusion, she said: 
“It is my believe... [this is at page 242.1] 
...that the CBD facility in its current form is not 
in the best interest of the company or the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 111 of 265 
 
country given potential capital leakage of up to 
R 3.7 billion in excessive interest expenses 
and excessive arrangement fees...” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “...may be classified as PFMA 
violation given the information...”  So that was her view. 
MR MOLEFE:   It was her view and ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There was another view held by 
Mr Singh, as you have said.   
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  The only thing that I did not do and 
10 
which maybe may have resulted in being misunderstood 
was that I never chastised Mr Singh in front of Ms 
Mathane(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
MR MOLEFE:   I never chastised Mr Singh in front of 
Ms Mathane.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   So I never in the presence of both said to 
Mr Singh you are wrong and she is right.  And even when 
she came to me, I never spoke bad about Mr Singh 
20 
because Mr Singh was her boss.  He was her superior.   
 
And what I – the advice that I gave to Mr Singh 
is that you must take the disagreements on your staff very 
seriously.  Listen to them.  And please, I do not want this 
thing that your staff disagree with you and you are having 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 112 of 265 
 
to come to me on conditions where your staff disagrees 
with you.   
 
This was a private conversation that I had with 
Mr Singh.  Please make sure that you sort out your house 
so that when you come to me you come with one position.  
But because of the disagreement, Ms Mathane’s concerns, 
none of the structures that came that she objected to was 
implemented at... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then, if you have a look 
at paragraph 135.  It reflects that Mr Singh then writes a 
10 
memorandum 
in 
response. 
 
Can 
I 
ask 
you 
to 
just 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us just to say 135 at MEM-33. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That memorandum you will find at 
MEM-285.  Could you go there, please? 
MR MOLEFE:   258? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   258, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And this – I would ask you to 
confirm, is Mr Singh’s response, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He puts forward his case.  And if you 
go to MEM-297 ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 113 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...you will see that what he asks you 
to recommend is:   
“It is recommended that the Group Chief 
Executive approves the response to the Group 
Treasurer 
for 
issues 
raised 
under 
USD 
2.5 billion loan facility with China Development 
Bank...” 
 
So he ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  So he wanted me to take a side. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  So I did not approve it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is why you noted it. 
MR MOLEFE:   I just noted ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...that that is his position.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So if you go to paragraph 136 at 
page MEM-33. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will see there at the foot of the 
20 
page Ms Makgatho said:   
“I find Brian Molefe’s response noted instead 
of 
approved 
as 
per 
paragraph 
5 
of 
the 
memorandum interesting.  This confirmed to 
me that Brian Molefe considered my analyses 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 114 of 265 
 
and conclusion that approximately 3.7 billion 
could be wasted costs have merit...” 
 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, actually, she is also not correct.  I did 
not take her side.  That is what my – what my noted...  I 
did not take a side.  So I did not...  Me saying noted, I was 
not taking a side because my advice to Anoj has always 
been:  Go and discuss with your people and come with 
one...  So the fact that...   
 
So if I had said in that memorandum not 
10 
approved, which means that I am taking Mathane’s side.  I 
think as a manager it would be wrong because it would be 
taking a side of a junior person against her superior.  That 
is a recipe for disaster.   
 
So even if you agree, you have to get them to 
come to one position at some point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I would imagine that if it...  I would 
imagine it would depend on what regime you have in the 
organisation.   
 
You have a regime that says the CFO must have 
20 
a discussion with his or her staff on matters that must 
come to you and as the head of that department, he must 
then give you his view and if he chooses to let you know 
that there is a view different from his, in his department, 
he must know he is taking the risk that now that you are 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 115 of 265 
 
told about this other view, you might find it attractive.   
 
And if it is the correct view, I would expect that 
you would not – you should not be prevented from taking 
the correct view just because it might... as the head of the 
department. 
 
But another regime might be, you are the head 
of the department.  You bring to me the outcome of the 
discussion with your staff.  And that regime might mean, 
there might be disagreements within his staff but he must 
take a view and that is the view that comes to the Group 
10 
CFO. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you agree with that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, except that it is not called a regime in 
the literature(?) style, management style.  Management 
style.  So my management style is collaborative. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Collaborative? 
MR MOLEFE:   Collaborative means we do not suppress 
views irrespective of from how junior the person may...  but 
why we do not suppress views, you acknowledge that the 
20 
executives that these people report to, if you like ego’s(?), 
and that you...   
 
So you have to find a way of accepting a view 
from a subordinate in a manner that does not create 
tensions in the organisation with the superior.  So it must 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 116 of 265 
 
be collaborative.   
 
And Chair, I did not care how long it takes.  I 
had 
resolved 
that 
they 
have 
to 
find 
each 
other 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...and come with a common position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   They have to find it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they did not find each other. 
MR MOLEFE:   And they were not finding each other. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you decided:  Look, I will not 
say this one is right, this one is wrong. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  And I did not implement ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you did not implement ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   ...any of their propositions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   I agree that at some point I would have had 
to make a decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
But 
I 
felt 
at 
that 
point 
had 
not 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
MR MOLEFE:   We are not in a crisis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  So it had to be collaborative. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 117 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I understand. 
MR MOLEFE:   And so...  Ja, in fact, when you read 
through her ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...affidavit.  You will see that there were 
tensions.  There were tensions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...sensitive to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I must repeat Chair that I did respect 
10 
Ms Mathane Makgatho... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is just that the situation that if she had 
been reporting to me and came with those structures 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...and I would also – and one of her 
subordinates had disagreed with her, I would have asked 
her to go back ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   ...until there is a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Consensus. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 118 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Molefe, that I think 
takes us to the 28 t h of August 2014 when you noted the 
memo.  So you have got these two conflicting views. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What we do know is that an 
agreement was concluded with China Development Bank on 
the 4 t h of June 2015 but by this time, as I just ask you to 
confirm, you had been seconded to Eskom.  Is that 
correct? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I will not express an opinion on that 
agreement but, ja, after I had left then it went in a 
particular direction. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will ask you if you go, please, to 
page MEM-34? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ms Makgatho then carries on with 
the chronology.  She talks about a presentation made by a 
20 
Mr Singh.  And then at paragraph 140, over the page, at 
MEM-35, she says: 
“Pursuant to Mr Anoj Singh’s representation to 
the 
board, 
the 
attached 
CDB... 
facility 
agreement was signed on 4 June, committing 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 119 of 265 
 
Transnet 
to 
a 
very 
expensive 
loan 
agreement...” 
 
She seems to have maintained her view, but by 
that time, as you say, you have left. 
MR MOLEFE:   I had left and perhaps it is up to the board 
and Mr Singh and the people that signed the agreement to 
come and put their case ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...as to why they thought it was in the 
interest of the company. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But as you say, you never, in the 
course of your term, put a stop to the potential Regiment’s 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No.  That is why – I did not see it as a 
Regiment’s thing.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I saw it as a disagreement by professionals 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...on how to structure a particular role with 
20 
the China Development Bank.  And I also acknowledge that 
the China Development Bank...  You see,  Mr Makgatho 
and myself, we did transactions for the National Treasury.   
 
We funded the fiscus on international capital 
markets and domestic capital markets but we always 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 120 of 265 
 
funded the fiscus from loans sourced from the Western 
world, from Europe, from the United States and sometimes 
we ventured into Canada and then we did Japanese loans.   
 
There we were very good.  We understood how 
that works.  The US financial market, the... markets, the 
institutions and the US, how they work.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   When I went to China to have a meeting 
with the CDB, I discovered that actually they were...  And 
even as I was leaving the Treasury, sourcing funds from 
10 
China was a new thing.  There were some several markets 
that were different than what we were used to. 
 
One of them was China and the other one was 
Suko(?), which is an Islamic – I think it is Islamic roles(?) 
with no interest.  So we were exploring these as a – I do 
not want to use the word exotic but as alternative sources 
of funding but that are very different from what we used to. 
 
So even in this disagreement, I was aware that, 
well, you know, part of the problem is that the CBD 
operates slightly different from a multi-lateral institutions 
20 
in the Western world.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Molefe, you have read, no 
doubt, that Regiments were paid 166 million as success fee 
for securing the CBD funding facility and their advice to 
split the capital raising between CBD and the so-called 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 121 of 265 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Have you read about the fact that 
they have got ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Is this ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   the success fee?  Yes?  Have you 
read about that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Not particularly.  I mean, I never look back 
at 
what 
was 
happening 
but 
in 
the 
context 
of 
the 
Commission, yes, it appears that is what happened but 
10 
when I had left Transnet, I did not try and do anything from 
the... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And certainly, on the money 
finances, half of that money would have found its way into 
a process of money laundering but as I understand it, your 
case is that you do not know about it. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Mohammed ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...in addition to this, Makgatho also 
gave evidence about this loan. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And his evidence was to the effect 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 122 of 265 
 
that Treasury had sufficient expertise to enter into the loan 
transaction.  He was of the view that there was no need for 
external support and that there was no need for the loan 
agreement fees to have been incurred. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Arrangement fees. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you recall that evidence? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you want to comment on that? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   On reflection Chair, I think that perhaps 
where I failed Ms Mathane.  Maybe what I should have said 
to her was, when we go to the meeting at Melrose Arch, 
bring two people with you that agree with you because then 
she can now argue that it was loaded against...  Maybe she 
felt that way although that was not the intention.   
 
The intention was to have a mature adult debate 
about this loan but perhaps on reflecting and on reading 
Mr Mohammed’s comments, I felt that perhaps I should 
have asked her to bring two people that agree with her so 
20 
that we can have a proper debate.  That did not, 
unfortunately, happened but...   
 
Yes, it is one of the regrets that I have.  Maybe 
that is what I should have allowed to have happened at the 
time. 
 
However, 
the 
disadvantage 
of 
that 
is 
that 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 123 of 265 
 
Mr Mohammedi worked in the Treasury and was even – was 
reporting to Ms Makgatho.   
 
So that would have – I mean, that would have, 
like, being bringing two people that are two or three levels 
below Mr Singh to come and argue with him.  Sometimes 
that does not build...  It is not that he is assertive.  She 
would have stood her ground.   
 
But, ja, maybe I should have said she can bring 
two people but then at the same time, sometimes people 
when the GC is present, the CFO and the Treasurer and 
10 
there is an argument, either just freeze and keep quiet.  
They do not want to take sides against anyone of those 
people because...   
 
Ja, which is another reason why I feel that the 
evidence that you get from people that are still at Transnet 
and Eskom, you must treat it in that context Chair that they 
feel 
like 
if 
they 
do 
not 
say 
what 
they 
think 
the 
Commissions wants to hear, they may lose their jobs.   
 
Ja, I am aware that there a lot of people that are 
seen as Brian Molefe-people that were... because they 
20 
were – they may – most people have not done anything, 
really.  They were very professional people.   
 
Unfortunately, they left.  They had to leave 
because I have been painted as by the Public Protector as 
somebody who was potentially corrupt and so it had a 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 124 of 265 
 
rippled effect on innocent people whose mission in life was 
just to look after their families.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So can I just ask you.  Do you agree 
or disagree with the – Mr Mohammedi’s view that he gave 
here before the Commission? 
MR MOLEFE:   What was his view again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it was simply that there was no 
need 
to 
incur 
the 
loan 
arrangement 
fees 
paid 
to 
Regiments. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I cannot comment on it Chair. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because it is a debate that happened after I 
left. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And perhaps just to 
conclude this, I will just put to you what he said in 
evidence that he gave on Day 93 and this you will find at 
page 144 of the transcript. 
 
He said: 
“The only possible plausible explanation from 
my perspective would be that there was an 
20 
agenda for payment to be made to Regiments, 
ultimately, or some entity that existed outside 
of the system...” 
 
I assume ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   H’m.  Is that here in the Commission? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 125 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I have experienced how the Commission 
and wants to make you say things that you feel at some 
point you are compelled to say just to get out of the 
situation.  Unfortunately, it is not all of us that are 
assertive.  So I would say that...   
 
I mean, especially if you are still working at 
Transnet.  Coming across a person like Mr Myburgh who 
says you knew and he knows that this means that – it could 
mean that he is going to lose his job.  Then he will say 
10 
anything.   
 
So I will take what he said with – well, not a 
tablespoon, just a pinch of salt and say that do not – and 
say 
that 
be 
careful 
to 
interpret 
that 
as 
an 
honest 
statement.  We do not know what his real honest statement 
would have been if you remove the circumstances that he 
finds himself in.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you feel comfortable saying that 
despite the fact that this was an agreement concluded after 
your time? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Saying what? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What you have just said about 
Mr Mohammedi. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I am just saying that Mr Mohammedi 
may have been influenced by other factors. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 126 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh, I see. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  So it may well be his true feeling but I 
am just saying discount it and know that I know that there 
are a lot of people that have come here and said things 
that I know they would normally not say...  It is like...  They 
call it a fishpond thing.  It is like a fish in a pond that is 
aware that it is being watched.  He behaves differently...   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just so that I understand it.  You 
were issued with a lot of 3.3. Notices ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...in this case, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And never once did you exercise a 
right, your right to put in a statement deposing what people 
said, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And never once did you exercise 
your right to cross-examine anybody, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Because...  You want to know why? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You can go ahead Mr Molefe. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Because, actually, going through those 3.3. 
Notices, I cannot recall, I may be wrong, but I cannot recall 
anyone implicating me in wrongdoing.  In wrongdoing.  
None of them implicated me in wrongdoing.   
 
And this morning when I came in here, I was 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 127 of 265 
 
listening to an application to cross-examine and I was 
listening to the criteria that the Chairperson was using that 
in – the Chairperson is in a hurry to finish.   
 
So if nobody has implicated me in wrongdoing, 
there was – then there is no need for me to come and 
waste the Chairperson’s time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   There was just once that mister...  I got an 
instruction 
from 
the 
Chairperson 
to 
respond 
to 
Mr Jabu Mabuza.  Mr Jabu Mabuza who did not know what 
10 
he was talking about, who had no idea what had been 
happening there and I responded to his, I think it is a 
Section 10 something notice that I got. 
CHAIRPERSON:   10.6 Directive. 
MR MOLEFE:   Was it a 10.6 Directive? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
  Ja.  The only 10.6 Directive was 
Mr Mabuza.  It was very surprising because Mr Mabuza’s 
evidence was things like:  Ja, Mr Molefe has skills but he 
was using these skills for other things.  I mean, that is not 
20 
an implication of wrongdoing  Number one.  Number two.  
He did not provide any evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   My response, the other day I submitted was 
very, very brief.  And I never heard anything from the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 128 of 265 
 
Commission after that.  Even when we were – even my 
cross ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   On Eskom?  Eskom? 
MR MOLEFE:   On the Eskom evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   His evidence was not referred to at all, just 
like Ms Madonsela’s evidence was not referred to in the 
Eskom... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
So 
do 
I 
understand 
your 
10 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   So nobody...  I cannot recall that anybody 
implicated me in wrongdoing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So do I understand you to be saying, 
as you sit here now, that you do not feel that you have 
been implicated at all in any wrongdoing?  It is different 
between guilty of wrongdoing.  Is your sense that you have 
not even been implicated in wrongdoing by ...[intervenes]  
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
I 
cannot 
recall. 
 
Maybe 
you 
can 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, you have received all the 3.3’s. 
MR MOLEFE:   I cannot recall that anyone of them 
implicated me in wrongdoing.  Ja, they talked about me.  I 
mean, I have got a 3.3. relating to Mr Pravin Gordhan who 
said that Mr Brian Molefe thought that the nuclear deal 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 129 of 265 
 
could be funded.  Of course I did.  And there is nothing 
wrong with that.  It could be funded.   
 
He had to be corrected by Mr Pretorius in this 
room, saying:  Mr Gordhan, in fairness, the engineering 
news has indicated how Mr Molefe says the nuclear deal 
can be funded, in an interview with Mr Molefe.  And 
Mr Gordhan’s response was:  Ja, but you must remember 
that Mr Brian Molefe is highly trained by us and he 
understands these things and so...   
 
And so I do not see why that was wrongdoing.  
10 
Why I had to get a 3.3. Notice that says that Mr Gordhan 
says you think the nuclear deal can be funded.   
 
Guess what?  A couple of weeks later, maybe 
months the new Minister of Energy is appointed.  This thing 
that he says is the future of this country is nuclear.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just want to say.  It must have 
been in the other venue where Mr Pretorius would have 
been leading the evidence of ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No, what I am saying is.  No, my – I mean, 
like, in the ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the Commission. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, in this home, house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, this hall is not a house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Ja, ja. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 130 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   It is the people that...  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, I see that it is one 
o’clock.  If this is a convenient time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  I think let us take the lunch 
break.  We will resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
 INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Chair. 
 
Mr 
Molefe 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe you could move your mic towards 
you a little bit. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Before lunch we were dealing with the 
China Development Bank loan.  I had wrapped up on that 
but I just wanted to ask you this.  Did I understand your 
evidence to be that generally when it came to Mr Singh and 
Ms Makgatho that you did not take sides or choose one 
20 
above the other. 
MR MOLEFE:   Look, I mean, I cannot be categoric in 
answering that question or be absolute but generally, as a 
matter of style, I prefer to be collaborative. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Alright.  Could I perhaps in that regard 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 131 of 265 
 
ask you to turn to page 18, MEN18, so that is EXHIBIT 
BB10, Ms Makgatho’s exhibit.  I want to ask you a few 
questions in that context around the so-called R5 billion 
proposal which she deals with in her affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH:    MEN18. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Chairperson, in EXHIBIT BB10a.  
Now if I could direct your attention to paragraph 68 and I 
am not going to deal with the whole paragraph, I am just 
10 
going to use the first sentence to locate us in time.  She 
says at paragraph 68 that: 
“My concerns about Regiments started in 2013, one 
day in 2013, I cannot remember the exact date but I 
believe it was in the third quarter of 2013.” 
She goes on to say she received a call.  Could I ask you 
then to turn over the page, to page MM19 and for us to 
pick up at paragraph 71. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh, you appear to or sound like 
you are saying MM each time you …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   I beg your pardon …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   MEN. 
ADV MYBURGH:   MEN, it is important, because of course 
MM is Mr Mohamed, I do beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 132 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   MEN19.  Are you there, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   At paragraph 71 she says: 
“The following days…” 
That is after that telephonic discussion. 
“I was a day where I had two important meetings, 
Finco and Capic.  These were monthly meetings 
with Finco scheduled in the morning from 9 to 1 and 
Capic in the afternoon from 2 to 5.  These two 
committees 
are 
subcommittees 
of 
Exco, 
are 
10 
responsible for finance and capital expenditure 
matters.  On that day Anoj Singh gave me a funding 
proposal from Regiments in hard copy and he 
informed me that it was a very important matter that 
Brian Molefe needed executed speedily.  He said 
that I should excuse myself from attending Finco 
and Capic and rather spend the day working on this 
urgent proposal and draft a memo recommending 
the proposal for his signature and approval by Brian 
Molefe.” 
20 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Do you want to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:   I cannot recall that I had needed an 
instruction to be executed urgently. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 133 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Okay.  She goes on to say at paragraph 
72: 
“The Regiments’ proposal was that Regiments will 
facilitate a five year R5 billion loan facility that was 
to be funded by Nedbank.” 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Does that job your memory at all? 
MR MOLEFE:   You say the Regiments will facilitate a five 
year R5 billion loan?  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   Sorry? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, what I could not recall was that I had 
said it must be executed urgently.  
ADV MYBURGH:   Urgently, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So if we could go then over the page to 
MEM20, paragraph 73.  
“The proposed facility was priced much higher than 
normal 
facilities 
or 
similar 
loan 
facilities 
or 
domestic bonds.  My calculation indicated that 
20 
Transnet would have to pay an additional 150 
million per annum in interest payments over and 
above what Transnet pays for similar facilities.  
This translated into potential losses of 750 million 
over a five year period.  I shared my analysis with 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 134 of 265 
 
Anoj Singh and indicated that I do not recommend 
the proposal given potential excessive costs in 
interest payments.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:    
“He responded saying that it is an instruction from 
Brian Molefe and that I should quickly complete the 
memorandum for approval the same day.” 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I do not recall that there was such an 
instruction from myself. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   She says in the next paragraph: 
“I felt very 
uncomfortable with the same 
day 
approval request as we have never rushed funding 
initiatives 
before 
and 
definitely 
not 
same 
day 
especially given the potential losses of 750 million 
over a five year period.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Paragraph 75: 
“I decided to discuss the matter directly with Brian 
Molefe and went to his office.  I told him that he 
20 
understood 
that 
he 
expects 
me 
to 
urgently 
recommend 
a 
R5 
billion 
five 
year 
loan 
that 
Regiments is proposing wherein a 150 million will 
be unnecessarily incurred per annum accumulating 
to 750 million over a five year period with no clear 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 135 of 265 
 
benefits for Transnet.  I was irate at that time, that I 
explicitly told him that should we approve the 
structure we will go to jail for stealing money as we 
are the custodians of Transnet’s funds.” 
Do you recall that? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do but I wish you could jump to paragraph 
83 and just leave all the drama and go to paragraph 83. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Look, Mr Molefe, just can we – I am 
going to come to paragraph 83 if you would like to. 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   But let me first deal with paragraph 75.  
Do you have any comment on it? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no comment. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But do you remember this meeting 
where she said if we recommend this, if we do this, we are 
going to go to jail for stealing money. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes, I remember that discussion. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So you do remember that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So had you given the instruction that 
20 
this funding proposal be completed and signed off in one 
day? 
MR MOLEFE:   Which is why I was asking you to go to 
paragraph 83 and leave all the drama. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Okay, so let us then go to 76: 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 136 of 265 
 
“The structure was overpriced, we have a direct 
relationship with Nedbank, there was no need to 
use a conduit like Regiments to engage with 
Nedbank.  Brian Molefe agreed with me and said 
that he will handle the matter.  The structure was 
never implemented.” 
With that – would you agree with that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I just wanted to say, Mr Molefe, 
sometimes the drama is necessary so that one has a good 
10 
picture of how the atmosphere was in that room as 
something was being discussed.  So I just wanted to say 
sometimes one needs it, sometimes not.  Okay, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair, the bottom line is that I agree 
with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   That the structure was never implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But, of course, the question arises is 
how could you ever have required Ms Makgatho to sign off 
20 
on this in one day, firstly. 
MR MOLEFE:   I just said I …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   And sorry, if you will let me finish.  And 
secondly, on this version how possibly could you have 
sought to endorse this type of proposal? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 137 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   I have said to you I have no recollection of 
asking anyone to implement a structure in one day.  I am 
not sure where it comes from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To prepare, to prepare, rather than to 
implement, you mean. 
MR MOLEFE:   Come again? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say you have no recollection of 
having instructed anyone to prepare the memorandum in 
one day. 
MR MOLEFE:   In one day, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  And I am just mentioning 
because you said implement in one day so but I am saying 
prepare in one day. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, to execute.  I mean, this was a 
request to execute in one day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, as opposed to preparing a 
memorandum in one day? 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
I 
do 
not 
know, 
my 
understanding 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought it was the preparation of the 
20 
memo …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   ...was prepare the memorandum and 
execute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I may be mistaken, I thought it was 
just the preparation of the memorandum. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 138 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Perhaps it is myself who is maybe 
mistaken, Chair, but my recollection is that she came to my 
office …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I see in paragraph 74 of her 
affidavit that she talks about (the approval) so the approval 
was to be in the same day, I think. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH:   so you do not have any recollection of 
that?  This was a proposal …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   But I do note that she does say that I said  
to her that the structure should not be supported. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes but that does not – that is not an 
answer to what I am probing with you, if you do not mind.  
This was a Regiments’ proposal, is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Was it? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja, she says at 72: 
“The Regiments proposal was that Regiments will 
facilitate a five year R5 billion loan.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes, yes.  Yes, her evidence says it 
20 
was Regiments’ proposal. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And what would the arrangement fee 
typically have been? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not recall, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes, I am asking you typically what 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 139 of 265 
 
would it have been for a loan like this?  You dealt with 
Regiments and McKinsey in other context like we have 
been through. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it depends on what it is. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Are you able to give us any insight from 
the position of Group Chief Executive what – well, what 
sort of transaction arrangement fee would you have 
expected Regiments to levy for this sort of loan facility? 
MR MOLEFE:   So the capital amount is at 750 million, 
maybe marching on 2 basis points. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   So how much would that have translated 
into? 
MR MOLEFE:   Two basis points is .002%. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes? 
MR MOLEFE:   Times 750, 35 million, thereabouts. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right.  And the other thing I wanted to 
indicate to you, how could you – but I think you accept that 
what you dispute is you did not require this to be done in a 
day but you were effectively looking to implement this loan 
agreement.   
20 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no I …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Is she wrong?  Is she wrong when she 
says that. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Oh. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 140 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Maybe that is the impression that was 
created. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Right. 
MR MOLEFE:   For her, to her.  I remember her bursting 
into my office and say this cannot be done and so on and 
so forth and I said what is it and then she explained to me 
and I said do not worry, I will not support that structure. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But Mr Singh’s evidence is it is what you 
wanted or play her version of what Mr Singh says is that it 
is something that you wanted. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, I say I do not recall asking for 
anything like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I wanted to say I think his 
position in relation to the proposal being completed in one 
day or executed in one day was he could not remember 
whether he gave such an instruction or not, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well – yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Now that I understand, but was it still 
your 
proposal? 
 
I 
understand 
that 
you 
did 
not 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it was not my proposal. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So insofar as she is saying that Mr 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 141 of 265 
 
Singh told her that that – I suppose we will have to 
canvass with Mr Singh. 
MR MOLEFE:   You have to canvass with Mr Singh. 
ADV MYBURGH:   This paints you in a very – potentially a 
bad light, does it not? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it does not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Does it not? 
MR MOLEFE:   No.  No, it does not. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   If I had said to her we must do it. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   I am just wondering why you never put 
in a statement contesting this. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because it was never done.  Paragraph 83. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But, Mr Molefe, the fact something is 
not done does not mean that it does not reflect potentially 
very poorly on you. 
MR MOLEFE:   It does not reflect on me because I do not 
recall such a …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   But then why did you not at least put in 
a statement to say that or something? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I deal with the evidence of Ms Makgatho . 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   In my affidavit, I cannot recall what I say 
there.  Well, in paragraph 69 of my statement I say: 
“I deny any suggestions of impropriety on my part.” 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 142 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Oaky, so just so that I have this 
because of course Mr Singh is going to give evidence.  Do 
you, as far as you are concerned, was this Mr Singh’s 
proposal. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not know whose proposal it was, Chair, 
I have no recollection of the origin or where this thing 
came from.  All I remember is Ms Makgatho  coming into 
my office very irate, explaining to me what was about to 
happen that there is a structure that needs to be done in 
one day and saying that it is just never done and I said do 
10 
not worry, I will not support it. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And she did not tell you who the 
instruction had come from? 
MR MOLEFE:   No.  She said Mr Singh, she said 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Oh, so you now – it was Mr Singh. 
MR MOLEFE:   But she said – that is her evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Her evidence, when you point to that 
says that Singh says it was your proposal. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, ja, ja, ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   It was – the person that she spoke to was 
Mr Singh.  I do not know what is the point of your 
semantics. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I beg your pardon? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 143 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   I say I do not know what is the point of your 
semantics. 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, it is not semantics, Mr Molefe, I am 
trying to get to the bottom …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Ms Makgatho  spoke to Mr Singh about this 
structure. 
ADV MYBURGH:   I want to simply ask you and I am going 
to move to another topic then. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   You understand that it was Mr Singh’s 
10 
proposal.  You say it was not your proposal.  Did you 
understand from your interaction with Ms Makgatho that it 
was Mr Singh’s proposal? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, let me just say I do not know whose 
proposal it was then. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Well, who would have the authority to 
make such a proposal? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not know – to have such a proposal, to 
make such a proposal?  I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH:   To ask Ms Makgatho to approve such a 
20 
proposal in one day.  Who would have been able to give 
her such an instruction? 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Well, 
Mr 
Singh 
would 
because 
…[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Anybody else? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 144 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Singh was her superior. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Would anybody else have been able 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Not to my knowledge. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So on the face of it, it seemed – did you 
assume that it was Mr Singh or not? 
MR MOLEFE:   To tell you the truth, I did not apply my 
mind to this, it was just a something that was just not 
going to happen in one day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me just ask this to clarify.  We know 
10 
that in her affidavit Ms Makgatho says this came – that Mr 
Singh came to her with this proposal. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get that from her affidavit or 
from when she was testifying or is the position that when 
she came to your office she also said that? 
MR MOLEFE:   No …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That it was Mr Singh who came with the 
proposal to her but he had said you had given the 
instruction. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, her evidence, paragraph 81, says she 
had lost patience with Anoj Singh and Eric Wood.  So it 
those two people that she had a discussion with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but I was – what I wanted to clarify 
is whether when she spoke to you, Ms Makgatho, in your 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 145 of 265 
 
office, when she came to your office and she was very 
irate, whether she did mention that it was Mr Singh who 
gave her the instruction to complete the – or prepare the 
proposal. 
MR MOLEFE:   She said she had been in a discussion with 
Anoj Singh and Eric Wood. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Alright, I 
10 
would like to turn then to a different topic.  Still under the 
heading of procuring consulting or advisers. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Do we keep the bundles that we were 
working with? 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, that bundle can be put away.  If I 
could ask you please to retrieve, Chairperson, bundle 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the Transnet …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   EXHIBIT 22, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then bundle 5 continues to stay?  
Okay, alright. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   EXHIBIT 22, yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH:   Now what I am going to deal with, Mr 
Molefe, 
are 
the 
– 
what 
I 
refer 
to 
as 
the 
McKinsey/Regiments consultancy contracts.  But perhaps I 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 146 of 265 
 
could start by asking you to go to page 129 of EXHIBIT 22.  
Bundle 5, it is your exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is better to always refer to the 
bundle, Mr Myburgh [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV MYBURGH:   Bundle 5, EXHIBIT 22, page 129, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   129. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Thank you.  I would like just to draw 
your attention to a chronology set out – this is the first 
money flows report and we will come back to it later. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   But it is paragraphs 44, 45 and 46 on 
page 129. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:    You will see that it is recorded that: 
“On 31 March 2014 Transnet decides to award the 
coal line contract to McKinsey and Regiments on a 
confinement basis without competitive bidding.” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Then: 
20 
“On 1 April 2014 Transnet decides to award the 
Kumba 
Iron 
Ore 
contract 
to 
McKinsey 
and 
Regiments 
on 
a 
confinement 
basis 
without 
competitive bidding.” 
And at paragraph 46: 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 147 of 265 
 
“On 3 April 2014 decides to award the manganese 
contract and the NMPP contract to McKinsey and  
Regiments 
on 
a 
confinement 
basis 
without 
competitive bidding.” 
So that is four contracts in the space of it seems four days, 
is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then if you could go to paragraph 
49, that is over the page, you will see there they record 
that: 
10 
“From 28 May 2014 to 24 June 2014 McKinsey and 
Regiments prepare bids for the coal line, Kumba 
Iron Ore, Manganese and NMPP contracts with 
Transnet.  Regiments indicates that they will be 
using 
Albatime 
and 
Homix 
as 
its 
supplier 
development 
partners. 
 
Albatime 
is 
Moodley’s 
company, Homix is a Gupta laundering vehicle 
which is ultimately paid more than R100 million of 
the 
value 
Regiments 
receives 
under 
these 
contracts.” 
20 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And whilst we are here, perhaps I could 
ask you to turn to page 330 in the same bundle and at 330 
you 
would 
find 
the 
bid 
by 
McKinsey, 
also 
included 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 148 of 265 
 
Regiments we will see in a moment and this related to the 
coal line.  Do you see that, at 330? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   If I could ask you please to go forward 
to page 345?  You will see there that there is a piece on 
McKinsey and Company and then at the bottom of the piece 
on Regiments.  Do you see that?  At 345. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Then over the page to 346 there is a 
bullet point saying: 
10 
“We…” 
That being Regiments. 
“…will subcontract consultants and services from a 
company advisory from Homix and Albatime and 
provide them with skills development.” 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   What is this document, by the way?  Is it 
their bid. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is a bid document? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Did you ever see this document? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 149 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no, I never see …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH:   And then if we go to page 350, this is a 
similar bid dealing with the …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   350 does not have – 351. 
ADV MYBURGH:   350 is the cover sheet, you are right.  
351 and 352, you will see it deal with the bid in relation to 
NMPP.  Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Contains the same content if you go to 
361 in relation to McKinsey and then over the page 362 
10 
you will see this time the third bullet point under the 
heading Regiments Capital: 
“We will subcontract consultants and services from 
companies such as company advisory, Homix and 
Albatime.” 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   So the long and the short of the money 
flow streams work reflects that we have four contracts 
concluded on a confinement basis in four days and then 
20 
there were bids submitted by McKinsey and Regiments, 
they 
indicated, 
that 
Regiments, 
that 
they 
would 
be 
appointing Homix and Albatime as their skill development 
partners 
and 
money 
flows 
say 
that 
ultimately 
what 
happened is that Homix, the Gupta laundering vehicle was 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 150 of 265 
 
ultimately paid more than R100 million from the proceeds 
received.  Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Now, as I understand your evidence, Mr 
Molefe, and I do not want to make you angry after lunch, 
as I understand your evidence, you say you knew nothing 
about this. 
MR MOLEFE:   I never saw bid documents. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   But do you have the contracts? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   We are going to come to that now, I just 
want to understand, you knew nothing about, as you said 
repeatedly, the money laundering. 
MR MOLEFE:   I knew nothing about? 
ADV MYBURGH:   The money laundering. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Okay.   So could I ask you please to go 
to EXHIBIT BB2.1(d). 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:   Just give me a second please? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I want to take you to the confinements.  So 
we have four contracts, four confinements, coal, Kumba, 
Manganese and NMPP.  Could I ask you to turn firstly to 
page – and these are the typed page numbers, PSV1283.   
MR MOLEFE:   This goes on to 838. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 151 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH:   Ja, 1283.  You may have the wrong file, 
so it is BB2.1(d).  I think you may have preceding number. 
MR MOLEFE:   Little d for Delta? 
ADV MYBURGH:   D for Deidre, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me make sure that I have got 
the right one because I might not be having the right one.  
The one I have on the spine, on the spine is written 
Transnet Exhibit BB2.1(a). 
ADV MYBURGH:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:    That is not the one? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:   No, you need small letter d, so Mr 
...[audio cut] ... in regard to Annexures A, B, C and D. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think put differently it is the last 
form in file insofar as that might help. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Your registrar.    
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the page?  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   PSV1283. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Yes, I believe I have 
20 
got it now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Molefe do you have 
page 1283?   
MR MOLEFE:    [no audible response]    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright so this is the ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 152 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Switch on your mic Mr Molefe. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, this is the – my shorthand, the 
coal confinement, is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I just want  to take you to 
page1289, it’s recommended that the Group Executive 
approve sub (1) the resourcing strategy and remuneration 
model for the coal line and then (2) confine and award 
services for support to the internal team, to McKinsey & 
Company and its BEE consortium partners, you signed off 
10 
on that, correct?  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then – that’s just for the sake of 
the record, because I understand that none of this is an 
issue unless you tell me differently.  Will you please, then 
turn to the second confinement, PSV1291. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And of course, on each of these 
confinements you set out your grounds for confinement, 
that we see as we page through, at the end of this is 1297 
20 
and you approved, again, confine and award services or 
support to the internal team to McKinsey & Company and 
its BEE consortium partners, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Proposed by Mr Singh, like the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 153 of 265 
 
previous time. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Or compiled by Mr Singh, I suppose 
is the correct word. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And approved by you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then, if I can ask you please to go 
to page PSV1299, is the Manganese confinement, if I could 
ask you to fast forward to page PSV1305 and there’s you’ll 
10 
see similarly at 40.2, confining and awarding the service to 
support the internal team to McKinsey & Company and its 
BEE consortium. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That, we see you approved on the 
3 r d of April 2014, correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the last contract or the last 
confinement the NMPP, that you find at PSV1307. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you would then go to the end of 
that contract or that confinement rather you find that at 
1313, it’s the same language at paragraph 41.2, confine, 
and award services for support to the internal team to 
McKinsey & Company and its BEE consortium partners 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 154 of 265 
 
approved by you, again, on the 3 r d of April 2014, is that 
right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, just by way of contrast could I 
ask you – and we may come back to this, to go to page 
1273, this is a different contract, it’s not amongst the four 
that I’m dealing with now, it’s a different confinement 
rather, I beg your pardon, it deals with capital optimisation 
and implementation support, do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   PSV1273, are you there? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just by way of contrast if I could ask 
you to go to page 1280, you’ll see that this has various 
levels of recommendation. There you have Mr Mahomedy, 
Mr Pita, Mr Singh, Mr Molefe and also – then recommended 
separately, it seems by Mr Volmink, do you see there? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
That 
the 
different 
type 
of 
confinement or a different means, correct? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   What do you mean it’s a different type of 
confinement? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What I’m saying to you is, here the 
various levels of authority and recommendation whereas in 
respect of the four confinements that I’ve taken you to, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 155 of 265 
 
there we see compiled by Mr Singh and approved by you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, but it’s not a different type of 
confinement it’s just…[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it’s a different – and my 
language is wrong, you’re right it’s a different approval 
mechanism? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, now, Mr Volmink gave 
evidence about these four confinements that you approved,  
could I ask you please to go to Exhibit BB2.1 and you can, 
10 
perhaps leave that file open.  I want to take you to a 
different  Exhibit, Exhibit BB2.1 but little (a), Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   2.1 (a). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Will somebody please help the witness, 
so he doesn’t have to stand and look for a file? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you please to turn to 
page PSV57. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Volmink says, and you would 
20 
have seen this, in the interest of time I’m not going to take 
you 
through 
all 
of 
it, 
he 
deals 
with 
grounds 
for 
confinement, paragraphs 125 through to paragraph 131 at 
page PSV60 and his evidence was that there were no 
proper grounds for confinement.  If I could take you to 126 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 156 of 265 
 
at page PSV58 he says, 
“The 
confinement 
memos 
rely 
mainly 
on 
two 
grounds, urgency and that services are highly 
specialised and largely identical”, 
 
And then he deals with that and he provides a 
criticism. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, you’ve seen this Mr Molefe, 
what is your response to Mr Volmink? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It might be better, Mr Myburgh if you just 
10 
summarised or tell him the gist so that the public can 
follow, also, when he gives an answer. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, what Mr Volmink says at 127, 
“Where 
urgency 
was 
evoked 
as 
a 
ground 
for 
confinement the case for urgency was based on 
revenue related risks and you need to deliver on the 
MDS. 
 The 
memos 
further 
stated 
that 
if 
the 
mitigation plans were not put in place, the corporate 
plan, capital plan and funding pre-requisites would 
not be met which would place the entire MDS at 
20 
risk, however, as already indicated in part one 
above, the PPM makes clear that confinements will 
only be considered where a genuine, unforeseeable 
urgency has arisen”,  
 
And, ultimately, the point that he makes is it wasn’t 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 157 of 265 
 
– the submissions you see in the middle of the next 
paragraph over the page, the submissions do not explain 
why revenue risk was unforeseeable, do you want to 
comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:   So, the issue is urgency or the advisability 
of revenue risk. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “Must be genuine unforeseeable 
urgency”. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He says, the submissions do not 
10 
explain why the risk was unforeseeable.  Mr Molefe you’ve 
looked at all of this before. 
MR MOLEFE:   To be quite honest here I am thoroughly 
confused. The names that you were talking about earlier 
but, by the way, I think it’s in [d]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Those were in little d, I think I asked 
you keep that file open if you wanted to.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, but the first one, what page was it, 
1273? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja the first one is, I think at 1283.  
20 
Mr Chairman, if I may just place one thing on record? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   1283? 
CHAIRPERSON:   1283. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   1283, Mr Volmink here, deals with 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 158 of 265 
 
these four contracts and he motivates why the confinement 
of the four were inappropriate.  We must, however, just 
bring to your attention, you will recall the evidence of 
Deirdre Strydom, her evidence was that she considered the 
confinement of the Manganese contract to be appropriate, 
so I just don’t want to be taken for misleading the witness, 
I need to make that qualification. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   What’s the qualification? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In respect of one of these contracts, 
10 
another witness, Deirdre Strydom, gave evidence, the 
Manganese 
contract 
that 
she 
considered 
that 
the 
confinement was appropriate. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Molefe perhaps…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   If you look at the first one, 1283, and you 
go to page 185 and paragraph 26 dealing with the grounds 
for confinement it says, 
 
“Appended 
below 
for 
ease 
of 
reference...[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, what paragraph? 
CHAIRPERSON:   26. 
MR MOLEFE:   26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 1285. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 159 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   “Appended below for ease of reference is.  
an extract from the current procurement procedures 
manual 
which 
sets 
out 
the 
grounds 
for 
confinement”, 
 
And it has ground A, B, C and D and then over the 
page it says, 
“We are of the view that this matter complies with 
grounds A and D as set out below and specific 
emphasis is placed on ground A and D due to the 
potential 
business 
risks 
associated 
with 
10 
approaching the market on an open tender process 
as well as the credentials listed above, 
 
And then in paragraph 28 there’s a table there that 
sets out confinement considerations.  So, I’m not sure 
which of these in these memoranda that – or even in this 
memorandum that Mr Volmink specifically found offensive. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, do I understand you to be 
saying, that different to Mr Volmink that you consider the 
confinements to have been properly motivated? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, because I can only go with the memo 
20 
that was presented to me and not Mr Volmink’s subsequent 
interpretation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, it was a memo presented to you? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, the memo presented to me has 
grounds for confinement, paragraph 25 to 29 so I wonder if 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 160 of 265 
 
there 
is 
any 
of 
these 
paragraphs 
that 
Mr 
Volmink 
considered offensive. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I think what he’s saying is, he 
doesn’t believe that the requirements for confinement were 
met.  As I understand you to be saying, well, if you look at 
the memo what was presented to me was a memo where, 
on the face of it, those requirements had been met. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, because it sets out what are the 
grounds for confinement, it actually quotes verbatim the 
procurement procedure manual and then it says, which of 
10 
the grounds in the procurement procedure manual are 
applicable. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Which is A and D and then it goes on to 
take the grounds for confinement as per the procurement 
procedure manual and then gives in tabular form the 
confinement considerations.  I mean I can go through 
everything and read it as it is in the memo. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I take you please – are you – 
you have Mr Volmink’s affidavit still open there? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, this is Exhibit BB2.1 (a) would 
you go to page PSV63. 
MR MOLEFE:   63? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 161 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You’re in the wrong file Mr Molefe, 
2.1 (a) is it not that one that you have in front of you? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I direct your attention to 
paragraph 
143 
under 
the 
heading, 
“confidential 
confinements”. 
MR MOLEFE:   143? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   143 yes at page PSV63, are you 
there? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It says, 
“Because 
of 
the 
potential 
for 
abuse 
of 
the 
confinement process the PPM introduced multiple 
levels of review and control to service safeguards.  
First the end-user department and the operating 
divisions, Chief Procurement Officer had to submit 
the request for confinement to the OD’s divisional 
acquisition council and the OD’s CEO for prior 
written support. If a request for confinement was 
20 
poorly motivated the submission would be sent back 
for re-motivation.  The submission would be sent to 
Group for sign-off only if it was supported at OD 
level, it goes on to say at 144, at Group level, the 
submission had to be reviewed by the Group Chief 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 162 of 265 
 
Supply 
Chain 
Officer, 
GCSCO 
and 
the 
Group 
Finance Officer, CFO. The practice at Group was 
that confinements were first sent to the SC and 
governance for review before they were signed-off 
by the GCSCO and the GCFO”.  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Over the page PSV64, paragraph 
145, 
“If 
the 
GCSCO 
and 
the 
GCFO 
supported 
the 
confinement it would be submitted to GCE, the 
10 
BABC 
or 
the 
Board 
itself 
for 
final 
approval, 
depending on the value of the transaction. The 
process for the approval of confinements is more 
fully described etcetera.  At paragraph 146, these 
levels of review were introduced as safeguards to 
ensure 
that 
confinement 
submissions 
were 
subjected to a robust review before they were 
submitted to the GCE or higher for sign-off.  These 
safeguards serve to protect the integrity of the 
confinement process and provided assurance to the 
20 
ultimate approval authority that the confinement 
memo was properly considered before being sent to 
him or her for sign-off, that being the GCE”. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   147, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 163 of 265 
 
“However, for reasons of confidentiality some of the 
McKinsey confinements such as Manganese, NMPP 
and iron ore transaction did not follow the normal 
review and sign-off process.  This meant that the 
confinements were taken to the GCE with little or no 
input from reviewing bodies”, 
 
You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, we’ve seen, in relation to those 
contracts they were compiled by Mr Singh and you signed 
10 
them. 
MR MOLEFE:   Please go on to read 148? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MR MOLEFE:   Please go on to read 148? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “The 2013 PPM states that, in  
instances where a confinement is confidential the 
GCE may approve such confinement without the 
confinement requests being routed by any other 
authority.  This was base on a provision in the 2013 
DLA 
framework 
that 
allowed 
for 
confidential 
20 
confinements.  There are a number of concerns with 
the manner in which confidentiality was invoked in 
the McKinsey confinements.  First, as already 
stated, multiple layers of review were bypassed as 
a result of invoking the confidentiality provisions”.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 164 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, no, not my point was – or it could be 
done in terms of the 2013 PPM but also if you look at the 
footnote, on page 64, Mr Volmink says, 
“The 2013 version of the PPM applied to the 
McKinsey confinement”. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but perhaps I could ask you if 
you wouldn’t allow me to also go to another paragraph in 
the affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, firstly, it says there, a number of 
10 
concerns 
and 
he 
talks 
about 
the 
multiple 
layers, 
I 
understand your answer to that then he says, 
“Secondly the confinement memos contained very 
little, if anything that explains why the submissions 
were confidential”. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why were these contracts – why 
were they confidential because there could be a bypassing 
of the process, potentially but then of course it would need 
to be confidential.  What was confidential about these four 
20 
contracts? 
MR MOLEFE:   If you go to the memo, itself, in the memo it 
says that the …[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, what page are we on now? 
MR MOLEFE:   1286. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 165 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   1286, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, it says, 
 
“We are of the view that …[intervenes]”. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MR MOLEFE:   1286, paragraph 27. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   “We are of the view that this matter.  
complies with grounds A and D as set out below and 
the 
request 
for 
confinement 
is 
therefore 
fully 
supported”. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Now, E in page 1285 says, 
“When goods or services being procured are highly 
specialised 
and 
largely 
identical 
with 
those 
previously executed by that supplier and it is not in 
the interest of the public or the organisation to 
solicit other tender offers as it would result in 
wasted money and/or time for transfer.  When this 
particular ground is intended to be used as a 
ground for confinement it is important to note that 
20 
all pre-requisites must be satisfied.  That is, the 
goods or services must be highly specialised, 
almost identical”. 
 
And then, in paragraph 28 at the bottom in the 
table, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 166 of 265 
 
“Any new service provider would have to develop its 
own methodologies and tools as well as obtain 
operational experience within a coal …[indistinct] 
environment.  Due to the specialised nature of the 
work, the new service provider will be required to 
understand the intricacies of Transnet’s operations, 
capital programme and overall NDS”.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, so what you’ve explained 
…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Those are the reasons I could advance. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but those reasons – and that’s 
Mr Volmink’s point, those are reasons A and D why you go 
the 
confinement 
route, 
they 
don’t 
deal 
at 
all 
with 
confidential confinements. 
MR MOLEFE:   But it’s supplied in there,  
“The specialised nature of the work, the new 
service provider will be required to understand the 
intricacies 
of 
Transnet’s 
operations, 
capital 
programme and overall…[intervenes]”. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but why does that make it a – 
20 
the need for a confidential confinement? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, the question is, did I understand that, 
at the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you? 
MR MOLEFE:   Of understanding Mr Myburgh, please be 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 167 of 265 
 
patient with me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sure, I’m asking you, did you 
understand it at the time. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I don’t think that was necessary 
because I was explaining. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what do  you think was not 
necessary, understanding the need for confidentiality or is 
it something else you’re talking about? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, Mr Myburgh interjected as I was 
answering and said, did you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And I felt that, that was not necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Molefe if I might just say that I 
interjected asking exactly the same question as the 
Chairperson, I simply didn’t understand what you said.  
You’re more than at liberty to answer the question. 
MR MOLEFE:   My understanding is that in terms of this 
memo that was put forward to me the reasons – the 
grounds for the confinement were stated and the grounds 
20 
for the confinement referred specifically to the procedure 
procurement manual, paragraph 16.1.2 and that they were 
elaborated on and I saw nothing untoward at the time of 
signing.  So, when Mr Volmink, exposed afterwards, says 
that no it did not cover confidentiality sufficiently, well I 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 168 of 265 
 
must say that that was not a concern that I had at the time.  
The fact of the matter is that the grounds for confinement 
are in paragraphs 25, 28 and at the time of signing this 
memorandum I had no issues with the grounds that were 
advanced, in fact I felt they were sufficiently articulated. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But you approved this by yourself, 
these four contracts, you did it yourself. 
MR MOLEFE:   I approve everything by myself. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but the point is …[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   After recommendation. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, that’s really what I’m getting 
at. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
I 
mean, 
we’ve 
seen 
other 
examples…[intervenes]. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
No, 
the 
people 
that 
recommend…[intervenes]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Molefe wouldn’t  you let me 
speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Molefe, let him finish, Mr Myburgh. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   No, but Chair when he does the same you 
must also tell him to let me finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I’ve done so before, even yesterday 
so I protect each one of you from each other. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I think it will be better if we address 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 169 of 265 
 
the Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, that’s it – you can do what you 
want but the point is, do you accept that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can’t divert everything to me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You’re probably much worse off if 
the Chair was asking the questions, so let me rather ask 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I mean, in some respects you 
could help us understand this.  In relation to these four 
10 
contracts, and you must tell me if my understanding is 
wrong, from what I’ve seen, you approved them yourself, I 
mean Mr Singh, it wasn’t a recommendation by him, he 
compiled it, he gave it to you, and you approved it. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, we’ve seen one other 
contract – I beg your pardon, confinement that went 
through multiple layers of approval, also of a confinement, 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, as I understand what Mr 
Volmink is saying, is that, really you don’t have the power 
as the Group Chief Executive to, yourself, approve any 
confinement.  The only time that you might be able to get 
close to doing that is in the case of a confidential 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 170 of 265 
 
confinement but even then, he explains that it needs to be 
reviewed by other parties.  I just want you to assist us with 
understanding how did you come to – you know we talked 
about these one-man acquisition councils, how did you 
come, in the absence of confidential to approving these 
contracts. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I do not agree with you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  That there was an absence of confidentiality. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright so then I need to – and before I 
10 
move on Mr Forming … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe Mr Myburgh before you 
continue let me just go back a little bit I wanted to ask 
something about the fact that Mr Singh presented himself in 
that memo as the compiler of the memo. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whereas we have seen other memos where 
he was recommended. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the question I wanted to ask you is 
20 
whether – where a memo that lands on your desk for you to 
provide approval for something has somebody who has 
compiled the memo but there is no indication that that 
person recommends that you should approve. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 171 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Whether 
the 
compiler 
is 
taken 
as 
somebody who is recommending or not necessarily he is just 
a compiler and it means that you have approved if you do 
approve you have approved without there being anybody 
recommending approval. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Chairperson if we go to Mr Volmink’s – 
Volmink’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you swallowed the last word. 
MR MOLEFE:  If you go to Mr Volmink’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yeah.  You have it or you are looking 
10 
for it? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is on… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want Mr … 
MR MOLEFE:  Exhibit BB2.1(a). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say D or E at the end? 
MR MOLEFE:  A – A for apple. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A – oh okay.  Okay just continue. 
MR MOLEFE:  Which page was that Mr … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the one with compiler?  The memo? 
MR MOLEFE:  No Mr Volmink’s affidavit. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Mr Volmink’s affidavit.  Mr Myburgh do 
you want to help Mr Molefe. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes you will find that – we were at 
page 64 last time of Exhibit BB2.1(a). 
MR MOLEFE:  He has visit before. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 172 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry PS ja PSV64 that is where we 
had stopped or in fact I think we had stopped at PSV65.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am at 65. 
MR MOLEFE:  65.  Now Chairperson first look at the 
footnote 75 at the bottom of the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Footnote at 65 yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  64- ESB006 – it says there 2013 version of 
the PPM applied to the McKinsey confinement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At page 64 footnote 75 you say? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The 2013 version of the PPM applied to 
the McKinsey confinements. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR MOLEFE:  And in paragraph 148 it says that 2013 PPM 
stated that in instances where or confinement is confidential 
a 
GCE 
may 
approve 
such 
confinement 
without 
the 
confinement request being rooted via any other authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So it was possible to do what you were doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And – so the question becomes did we 
consider it – did we consider these confinements to be 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 173 of 265 
 
confidential? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then I fail to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay before you go far I know I think you 
probably have my question in mind and Mr Myburgh’s 
question in mind.  What you have just said I think I 
understand within the context of Mr Myburgh’s question but 
for me the only question I was asking is whether compiler 
was taken to be also recommending or not necessarily? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well these things… 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Whereas Mr Myburgh’s question 
related to whether you could approve something without it 
being recommended by somebody else? 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja but it says without the confinement request 
being rooted via any other authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I understand that insofar as you 
mean.  You did not need to have it recommended by 
somebody? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand that part. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that supposed to mean compiler means 
just compiler and not necessarily that (inaudible). 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja it could have been a compiler, it could 
have recommended. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 174 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Or he could have compiled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you could approve without so to 
speak a recommendation? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Although it is a recommendation – oh ja okay 
let us just say even if it is not a recommendation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  So now the question becomes do these 
qualify from the point of confidentiality to be treated in the 
manner that the 2013 EPM  
CHAIRPERSON:  Prescribed. 
MR MOLEFE:  Envisaged – prescribed and what I said is – 
alright okay fine.  Now where are those things Mr Myburgh – 
oh here.  If you go to the memo the – the memo on 
PSB1286. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1286? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes PSB1286.  So if you look at 1286 in that 
table – PSB1286. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that BB2.1.d – not on the spine?  Is that 
Exhibit… 
MR MOLEFE:  It is PSB1286. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 175 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the spine what is written? 
MR MOLEFE:  BB2.1.d for Delta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  D for Delta.  Okay.  And then page 1286. 
MR MOLEFE:  1286.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have got it.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Now – so now we are trying to determine 
whether these things can be considered confidential.  So the 
second – the second block D – Goods and services being 
procured is highly specialised and largely identical.  Now the 
– on the right it deals with the speci – this specific case.  
10 
The left if what the procurement manual requires.  So there 
are bullet points there amongst them. 
“The skill requires specialised management 
skill in managing operations within a coal rail 
environment.  McKinsey has a proprietary 
coal demand and supply models as well as 
key operating philosophies that Transnet can 
use.  The tool is available from only one 
supplier that is McKinsey.  We have satisfied 
ourselves that there is no new entrant who 
20 
can perform the work through the following 
manner. These philosophies and tools have 
been implemented and delivered.  Increases 
in volume tempo at desired levels in the 
past.  McKinsey has provided this type of 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 176 of 265 
 
service in the past to Transnet Freight Rail.  
Any new service provider would have to 
develop its own methodologies and tools as 
well as obtain operational experience within 
a 
coal 
rail 
environment. 
 
Due 
to 
the 
specialised nature of the work a new service 
provider will be required to understand the 
intricacies of Transnet’s operations capital 
programs 
and 
overall 
market 
demand 
structures.” 
10 
So what it is saying there is that McKinsey has done this 
work they have a proprietary ownership of the models that 
they have used.  A new entrant would either have to take Mc 
– use McKinsey's models or develop their own.  And then 
they would have to understand Transnet’s business operating 
model, capital program and overall MPA. 
 
I think that this satisfied the confidentiality. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sure Mr Myburgh is going to ask 
you how. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chair I am just going to ask one 
20 
question really and that is – we have got a lot else to deal 
with.  But Mr Volmink deals with that and he says in effect 
you make out a good case for why there should have been a 
confinement but you make out no case for why it had to be 
confidential.  Because it is only confidential confinements 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 177 of 265 
 
that you are allowed to – as you point out approve without 
rooting to any other authority.  But I am not sure there is 
anything else that needs to be said here.  Do you want to 
add anything more to your answer? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Confidential of course means … 
MR MOLEFE:  Secret. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Only a few – ja only a few people should 
know about it. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh about the memo? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you – I take it that if it is said that 
10 
certain confinements must be confidential the requirement of 
confidentiality is there to protect certain interests that is 
what I am thinking. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  In this instance it was the proprietary coal 
demand and supply models.  I agree they were not in the 
memo but I understood – my understanding of confidentiality 
was 
that 
we 
are 
dealing 
with 
confidential 
Transnet 
information and in this instance the confidential information 
20 
of McKinsey of the proprietary models of McKinsey.  So that 
is where in my understanding confidentially – confidentiality 
kicked in in this instance.  That was my understanding it may 
have been flawed but that is how I understood it at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 178 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I just wanted to perhaps to put to 
you I mean is a good example not of a confidential 
confinement really where you did not want anyone to know 
within your organisation you were doing something that 
needed to be secretive because if people knew about it that 
it would undermine them.  I mean one can think of many 
examples I suppose but is that not really what – when you 
would invoke… 
MR MOLEFE:  But the PPM said confidentiality. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  It did not say within the organisation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sure. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But I am just trying to engage here 
would you agree with me – I am trying to work out when 
would you invoke a confidential confinement presume it is 
because you do not want other people to know.  You do not 
want it to go around the organisation because that could 
itself then breach the confidentiality. 
MR MOLEFE:  No in this understanding I am saying my 
20 
interpretation of confidentiality means the confidentiality of 
the tools and the information that a supplier would need to 
have.  So it is not confidentiality within the organisation but 
confidentiality in – as I understood it here confidentiality in 
as far as if other suppliers came in. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 179 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright – yes.  So I do not think I can it 
much further just to repeat that Mr Volmink is saying in 
response to what you say is that you have made out a good 
case as to why there should be a confinement on grounds a 
and b but not one as to why you should invoke the 
extraordinary confidentiality confinement provision. 
MR MOLEFE:  He is entitled to his view. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon. 
MR MOLEFE:  He is entitled to his view. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sure and it seems that you at 
10 
loggerheads there 
MR MOLEFE:  Sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have different views when it comes 
to that. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja it would appear that we have different 
views. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh okay.  Now let me move on – I have 
then dealt really with so far a whole series of contracts, 
consultancy 
contracts, 
advisory 
contracts 
involving 
Regiments. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not want to disturb you.  I just mention 
this and Mr Molefe you can say something if you wish to but 
you do not have to.  It may well be that that requirement of 
confinement was put in there for Transnet’s benefit. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 180 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not for outsiders because it is the 
confinement that must be confidential.  So you want to … 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes the reason for the confinement Chair is 
that where you cannot source the goods or services 
anywhere else then you can confine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Let us take … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is just the confinement. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja that is just the confinement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I understand that part ja. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja so let us say that – let us say that the – 
the – what the required is a Mercedes Benz C Class you will 
not get it from BMW.  Now part of the reason you cannot get 
it from BMW is that Mercedes Benz has proprietary assets – 
proprietary knowledge of the Mercedes Benz C Class and 
that is secret.  That is confidential to them and therefore for 
reasons of confidentiality you cannot go out and say I would 
like for example Kentucky Fried Chicken with its secret 
recipe from everybody. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see I think when you talk about it 
20 
in that context. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then the requirement for confidentiality is 
not necessarily for the benefit of Transnet but it is for the 
benefit of the person who has got some proprietary rights. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 181 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whereas the proposition I was putting to 
you earlier was that it may well be that the requirement in 
Transnet’s policy that there should be certain confinements 
that are confidential was put in there for the benefit of 
Transnet not for the benefit of outsiders. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the PPM did not go that far. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Could I then take you back 
please to Bundle 5 Exhibit BB22 your exhibit. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  So we can put away this one? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think you can keep those – just keep 
them for the moment.  
MR MOLEFE:  Bundle 5.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you mention the page already or not 
yet? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  130 Chairperson – 130. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let me direct your attention to two 
20 
other contracts that you were involved in.  At paragraph 51 
on 9 September 2014 deadline for submission of the SWAT 2 
bid of McKinsey and Regiments.  This is another contract 
that has been awarded for McKinsey and Regiments on a 
confinement basis without competitive bidding and which is 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 182 of 265 
 
later discovered to have been used by Regiments to launder 
Transnet’s payments through Homix and other Gupta laundry 
vehicles designated by Essa.  You recall that you were one 
of the signatories to the SWAT 2 confinement? 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja I may have been do you have the 
agreement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We will come to that now.  And then 
the next paragraph 52 we see on the 24t h of March 2015 
there is a – was an entry in Mr Sagar’s diary for a meeting 
with Mr Essa and Wood – you can leave that out for present 
10 
purposes.  On the same day 25 March Brian Molefe issues 
his recommendation for the GFB contract to be awarded to 
McKinsey and Regiments on a confinement basis without any 
competitive bidding.  This is another contract which is 
discovered to have been used by Regiments to launder 
Transnet payments through Gupta laundering company.  You 
see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps I could just take you to those 
two contracts quickly.  We are back in Mr Volmink’s bundle 
20 
Exhibit BB2.1(d).   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And this confinement appears at page 
1273 or one of them does.  1273 and it is signed at 1280. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 183 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that goes through various layers 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then the GFB contract I think we 
find at page 1314 or 1315.  PSB 1315.  Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  1315? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes and it is signed I think through 
multiple layers at 1322. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama, Mr Singh, Mr Molefe this 
10 
time.  You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright so just to summarise Mr Molefe 
what we have been dealing with for the better part I suppose 
of the day is the – the 1064 transaction advisors contract 
that we started out with yesterday. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We have dealt with increases in the 
scope of that contract.  Increases in payments to Regiments.  
We have dealt with the allied China Development Bank loan 
20 
and payments to Regiments.  We have dealt with the four 
confinement contracts or confinements that were entered 
into in four days.  And we have also dealt with these 
remaining two contracts SWAT 2 and GBF. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 184 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is what we have been dealing with 
for the better part really of a day. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And as you know certainly according to 
the money flows team. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  All of the or half of the remuneration in 
effect that was earned by Regiments in respect of those 
contracts working alongside McKinsey and sometimes by 
themselves went to Mr Essa and there was then money 
10 
laundering in favour of the Gupta’s.  I just wanted to put that 
to you so that you understand the extent of the money 
laundering.  It ranges through all of those contracts.  You 
appreciate that I know by now? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  I want then to turn to the next 
topic and that is the procurement… 
MR MOLEFE:  Before we close that if I may Chair?  I think 
the discussion of these contracts clearly show that the 
contracts were awarded in terms of Transnet policy and that 
20 
I was involved in the award of the contracts and that there 
were clear recommendations for the award of the contracts 
and the grounds for the award of the contracts was clearly 
set out in the memorandums and that on the basis of what 
was presented in the memoranda for the award of the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 185 of 265 
 
contracts they were awarded.  However what was not – was 
not shown was that I knew that part of the payments would 
go to Mr Essa or that there would be money laundering 
involved.  That has not been shown.  Or that I knew or 
intended that the contracts should be used for money 
laundering by Mr Essa.  It actually starts with the fact that I 
do not even know Mr Essa.  But – but I do not think it was 
shown in this exercises that I knew or intended that the – 
and so just to close the comment I also deny any suggestion 
that I knew or intended that these contracts would be used 
10 
for money laundering or any other purpose other than what is 
contained in the memoranda that I have signed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  So Mr Molefe I want to 
now move from the procurement of consultants and advisors 
to the procurement of – of locomotives and I am going to ask 
you some questions I am sure as you can imagine in relation 
to the 95 locomotives, the 100 locomotives. 
MR MOLEFE:  Can I just… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which bundle should we go to? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is not one discreet bundle. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay do (inaudible). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you also want to undertake a bit of 
housekeeping for that … 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 186 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you – you let us know once we do need 
to go to any particular bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am going to start by going to Exhibit 
BB3(a).  That is Mr Mahomedy’s bundle.   
CHAIRPERSON:  BB22 can go for now?  I take it can go – 
can be taken away for now? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr Molefe I am sure you will 
appreciate that I am going to have to try and focus in 
10 
relation to the locomotives onto the core issues otherwise we 
could literally be here forever.  So you will bear with me.  I 
am not – I am not trying to be – to trick you or not tell the 
whole story I deliberately want to try and focus on what I 
consider to be the key issues.  And in relation to the 95 
locomotives I want to start off by just dealing with one 
discreet issue if I may. 
 
And if I could ask you please to turn to Exhibit 
BB3(a) that is Mr Mahomedy’s exhibit and ask you to turn to 
page NSM203.  You will see at pages 203, 204 and 205 there 
20 
the effect of series of emails which I just want to ask you 
one or two questions about it if I may? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The – we know that the RFP in relation 
to the 95 locomotives was issued on the 6t h of December 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 187 of 265 
 
2011. 
MR MOLEFE:  6t h of December. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The RFP was issued. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  On 6 December 2011. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now if you have a look at the email at 
the foot of page 203 it is from Mr Gary Peter to someone at 
10 
CRS and it says: 
“Dear Mr Wang Pan my CEO Mr Brian Molefe 
advised me that you met in early December. 
He also stated that CSR showed interest in 
participating in our next tender for the 95 
electric locomotives.  I wish to advise you 
that this tender has been released and is 
available.” 
So when in December did you meet with this gentleman? 
MR MOLEFE:  My – my recollection was that it was before 
20 
the 6t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was before? 
MR MOLEFE:  The 6t h – before the tender was issued. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  But what actually happened the meeting 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 188 of 265 
 
was organised by the I think it was the Chinese Embassy and 
they said that there is a company that manufactures 
locomotives in China and they have never done any business 
with Transnet and that they would like to come to South 
Africa to have a meeting with Transnet to understand the 
Transnet’s business.  So they came quite a big delegation 
and they – they made a presentation about their company 
and they manufacture locomotives and who their clients are 
and so on and so forth.  At the beginning of course we made 
speeches about how the people of China and the people of 
10 
South Africa have always worked together and the brothers 
and so on so it was a very nice diplomatic meeting.  And at 
the end of the meeting I said well if you are interested we 
will 
soon 
be 
having 
a 
tender 
for 
the 
acquisition 
of 
locomotives.  You are more than welcome to bid.  And I think 
that either Gary Peter was in that meeting or I must have 
said to him afterwards this company, maybe I did not even 
give him a profile - is interested in bidding for the 95 
locomotives.  Please contact them because they did say 
that they are interested.   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So do I understand that at the time 
that you met with CSR you knew that you were on the point 
of issuing an RFP? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Yes.  And I mean, that was in the 
MBS. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 189 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So it must have been a few days 
before, on your version? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think it was a few days before because 
Gary Pita says here in early December. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So it was maybe a few days before but it 
was definitely before. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because I remember saying to them we will 
be going out to market very soon and if you really keen on 
10 
starting to do business with us, maybe if you start by 
submitting a tender. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if you go towards the top of 
the page, there seems to be ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   And Chairperson, encouraging people to 
submit a tender is not a bad thing because it improves the 
competitive tension in the tendering process. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What we see at the top of the page, 
there 
seems 
to 
be 
a 
response 
from 
CSR 
on 
the 
19 t h of December. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“Thank you for your email.  We were pleased 
to have a chance to meet with your Group 
CEO, Mr Brian Molefe, at the beginning of 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 190 of 265 
 
December...” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“We expressed our interest in your tender for 
95 electric locomotives in the South African 
market as well...” 
 
And then it ends off: 
“You are very kind to facilitate us your support 
on the tender document if we need and inform 
you...” 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You confirm that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  I think that, like I said, out of the – 
about mister..., this may be – this sentence may be a 
reflection of how they would have put in Chinese but not to 
write it in English, to say that...  Ja, I do not know.  We are 
interested in this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Any assistance would be welcome.  Or 
something like that but it is not elegant. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   It is a reflection of a...  It is something that 
is done by people who are second or third or fourth 
language, English speakers like myself. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you then to, please, go 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 191 of 265 
 
to page MSM-205? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now it seems that what happens 
there is that the email at the foot of the page comes from 
CSR. 
“Dear Mr Molefe.  Please be kind to check 
attached letter which has already been sent to 
you, sent by fax to you...” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Come again? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you see the email that I am 
referring you to? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   On the 19 t h.  And do I understand at 
the top of the page, is that your response? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“Thank you for your letter.  I forwarded to 
Mr Gama.  We will process and respond to 
your request.  Thank you for the interest 
20 
shown in the tender...” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And can you recall what that letter 
had said or provided for? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think that letter was a – may or may have 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 192 of 265 
 
been a request to visit our facilities, our TFR facilities.  
And all I did was to send it to Mr Gama firstly because he 
is the Group Executive for TFR. 
 
And secondly.  In this, people who are bidding, 
the bids were being evaluated from TFR and so they will 
deal with the fact that if this guy is a bidder and is making 
contact, what are the implications. 
 
So I did not do anything with this letter other 
than to forward it to TFR for them to deal with as they see 
appropriately.  And what I did was to inform them that is 
10 
what I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  I would like now to move to 
the 100, 21 E-electric locomotives.  Alright? 
CHAIRPERSON:   A 100 and 21? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   A 100, 21 E-electric locomotives.  
Perhaps just for easy of reference, a hundred locomotives 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  
MR MOLEFE:   I do not know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And the page where we are going, would 
20 
be? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think we are going to start getting 
into Mr Callard’s exhibits now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Uhm... 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 193 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Callard’s one is a different bundle? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  It is, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So we are done with this one? 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a different bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Callard is BD-4a.   
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Again, I am going to 
summarise some of the evidence so that we can try to get 
to the point.  You will remember that in relation to these 
locomotives, there was an improved Business Case for 
10 
confinement to Mars which it also referred to as Mitsui on 
occasion.   
MR MOLEFE:   There was an approved Business Case for 
confinement to Mars. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja, but we can ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Mars is Mitsui. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I mean, should I call it Mars or 
Mitsui?  Which would be the better term? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, either one.  As long as you understand 
that we are talking about Mitsui. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, let us use Mitsui then.  But we 
know that ultimately - and we are going to come to the 
detail 
– 
we 
know 
that 
you 
withdrew 
this 
and 
you 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 194 of 265 
 
recommended instead confinement to CSR.  Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In a memorandum to the board dated 
the 21 s t of January 2014. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I take it that you would accept 
that several grounds for confinement in the Mitsui memo 
were then reproduced in the CSR memo? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you accept also that Mr Callard 
10 
was the author of the Mitsui Business Case? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, you see, Mr Callard was the author of 
the Business Case for the confinement of 100 locomotives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja.  Alright.  But I think we agree 
with one another. 
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
I 
want 
to 
go 
to 
the 
23 r d of January 2014 
where 
Mr 
Callard 
complaint 
to 
Mr Gama. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I see you have some documents 
there.  Do you want to refer to them or what...? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Mr Callard ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You want to refer to those 
documents now or do you want to do so later or...? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 195 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, before you are going to ask your 
question.  Mr Callard says that he did not know about the 
confinement to CSR.  And I have, firstly - and the reasons 
for the confinement to CSR.  Firstly, I have documents here 
Chairperson that I got also in the course of the last one or 
two days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not speak away from the mic. 
MR MOLEFE:   I said, firstly, I have a few documents here 
that I got in the last – in the course of the last 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the course of...? 
MR MOLEFE:   In the course of the last one or two days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I have got some more documents with 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would we ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   And these are documents – and these are -- 
and these I have not seen before but somebody who is at 
Transnet came to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   And said that I am aware ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That they are relevant? 
MR MOLEFE:   ...Mr Callard is saying that he did not know 
about the confinement for the 100 and the reasons for not 
confining to Mitsui.  But these are reports from engineers 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 196 of 265 
 
that detailed the failures of the Mitsui locomotives over a 
period of time. 
 
In fact, what this guy was telling me was that the 
train drivers and the engineers on the coal line were 
relieved but eventually did not confine to Mitsui.  And 
these are letters and emails to Mars to the – Mr Ravi Nair, 
acting Chief Executive of Transnet Freight Rail... 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess what we should do is.  Have you 
got copies for the legal team or not really?  Do you have 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get a chance to have copies 
made for the legal team or ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   I do not have copies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but you can ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   But I do not mind parting with these copies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe you can make them 
available to ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Because after today, if somebody says 
Transnet to me... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to the legal team and they will in due 
course have a look at them and see what should be made 
of them. 
MR MOLEFE:   But what ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 197 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   ...there is that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If you need to refer to them in your 
evidence, I am sure that can be dealt with. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  I would like to take you, 
please, to page FQC-216.   
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So on the 23 r d of January, 
Mr Callard writes to Mr Gama. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And it seems also to – is it 
10 
Mr Jiyane, it would have been? 
MR MOLEFE:   Come again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Who is Thammy Jiyane. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  That is Mr Jiyane as well. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MR MOLEFE:   Did you say he writes to Mr Jiyane? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, I am asking you.  It says:  Dear 
Sia and Tammy.  Is that Mr Jiyane? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is Mr Jiyane.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  He says: 
20 
“This is a difficult mail to write.  In helping to 
format a recent version of the 180 locomotive 
Business Case on Wednesday, 22... [that was 
the day before] ...I notice that the case was 
changed from that which I had submitted on 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 198 of 265 
 
Monday.   
This email is because of the nature of those 
changes and the implications.   
The implications are technical and in the 
rationale for the acquisition which was speedy 
delivery to mitigate MDS volumes at risk. 
Project 
Shongololo 
was 
predicated 
on 
19 
equivalent locomotives. 
These locomotives are 26-ton per axel...” 
 
And then he says in the next paragraph: 
10 
“The locomotives proposed... [and this is in 
your 
Business 
Case] 
...are 
not 
explicitly 
specified but if a current and delivered design 
is the criteria then it is the E-20. 
This locomotive is a 22-ton axel locomotive...” 
 
And he goes on to say: 
“This was specified as a GF locomotive.  
The implications are that the locomotive is not 
a heavy haul locomotive, is not as powerful 
and the locomotive calculations for Operation 
20 
Shongololo no longer hold and the project and 
volume targets may be at risk. 
Furthermore, the locomotives cannot inter-
operate with the current 19-E locomotives, 
adding further complexity. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 199 of 265 
 
To have the 20-E inter operate with the E-19 
will require that they be fitted with wired DP at 
an additional costs of around a million rand 
per locomotive. 
If the locomotives are of a new coco design, 
which will meet the primary requirements, then 
all the arguments relating to time saving use 
and improving design and eliminating type 
testing no longer hold...” 
 
And over the page at FQC-217: 
10 
“...between the assembly line to the current 
20-E has yet to produce a locomotive. 
If local assembly is the criteria then ramping 
up this line up to meet the 95 20-E and this 
100 delivery criteria is a risk that has not, in 
my humble opinion, been visible addressed. 
If imported as complete units then the local 
content is problematic although the delivery 
programme is achieved. 
Respectfully 
for 
your 
information 
and 
20 
consideration.” 
 
Now 
did 
you 
ever 
see 
this 
email 
from 
Mr Callard? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I just saw it recently.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So I would want to take you, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 200 of 265 
 
if I may, to page FQC-219. 
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama and Mr Callard sent the 
email to Mr Gama on the 23 r d of July – sorry, January – at 
15:50.  That evening at 21:22, Mr Singh – sorry, Mr Gama 
wrote to Mr Singh. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It says: 
“Hi, Mr Singh.  I am afraid the submission of 
the 100 locomotives is a mess and would need 
10 
to be withdrawn...” 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
“The 20-E locomotive is a 22-ton...” 
 
This really mirrors what Mr Callard had said. 
“The 20-E locomotive is a 22-ton per axel 
locomotive suitable for GFB while the 19-E 
locomotive is a 26-ton per axel beast suitable 
for the coal line. 
The two locomotives types are not inter-
20 
operable 
while 
CSR 
can 
make 
additional 
locomotives in China in a very short space of 
time to mitigate against MDS volume loss. 
This will be counter to localisation strategy 
and would have to be spelt out. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 201 of 265 
 
The 85 locomotives to be assembled by... has 
not yet commenced. 
We cannot yet make any argument that this 
would reduce the risk. 
In an argument, therefore, on the 20-E ought 
to have been a GFB argument which then 
means we accelerate GFB but we need to go 
out to tender for wanting E-type locomotives.   
The 20-E Loco is not heavy haul locomotive 
but is a less powerful loco than the 19-E...” 
10 
 
So would you accept that what Mr Gama really 
does, is he forwards to Mr Singh the same concern raised 
by enlarge Mr Callard? 
MR MOLEFE:   The same misinformed concern. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MR MOLEFE:   I say, the same misinformed concern. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  And ...[intervenes]  
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Their 
understanding 
was 
that 
he 
confinement to CSR was for a GFB locomotive and not a 
heavy haul locomotive.  And in fact, Mr Callard may have 
20 
implied 
that 
CSR 
does 
not 
have 
the 
capacity 
to 
manufacture a heavy haul locomotive but CSR did have 
that 
capacity 
to 
manufacture 
the 
– 
a 
heavy 
haul 
locomotive. 
 
In fact, the heavy haul locomotives that they 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 202 of 265 
 
manufactured were much, much more powerful for our 
requirements that were in operation in China.  And also, 
the 
speed 
with 
which 
they 
could 
manufacture 
the 
locomotives, I mean, I – their production line is very 
impressive in how they can turn locomotives out of their 
production line. 
 
So I think that to the extent that Mr Callard and 
subsequently Mr Gama think that CSR was incapable of 
manufacturing 
heavy 
haul 
locomotive, 
they 
were 
not 
correct but I think that you may have to speak to Mr Gama 
10 
himself and to Mr Jiyane. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No we certainly are going to 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   [Indistinct] I met Mr Jiyane socially 
somewhere and he said to me that the Commission is 
refusing that he comes and gives evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Refusing? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Those were his words. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   He said:  They do not want me there.  He 
20 
says he has requested and requested and requested.  And 
they do not want me to come and give evidence.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did he indicate to you that he is 
happy to give evidence? 
MR MOLEFE:   He said the Commission.  I do not know 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 203 of 265 
 
who it is but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it would be important to see if he 
has got any correspondence to that effect or he can give 
people’s names, but what I can say is that, for some time 
knowing that our last pen is limited.  We have been 
seeking to make sure that we are careful in terms of our – 
the importance of evidence that witnesses will give, who 
will come will give. 
 
But if there is any correspondence, I am not 
aware that necessarily anybody has made any decision on 
10 
that but it may well be that what he is talking about is that 
he may have been in communication with either some 
members 
of 
the 
Legal 
Team 
or 
members 
of 
the 
Investigation Team and they have not said they would 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No, he showed me correspondence from – 
before he left Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m 
MR MOLEFE:   From an acting Group Chief Executive, not 
the current one, but the guy who was acting before.  I 
20 
cannot remember his name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Email, which specifically forbid him to come 
to the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody from Transnet? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 204 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:   From Transnet.  But also on his own 
volition, he made contact with the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And was given a cold shoulder. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And Mr Jiyane(?), Chair, was at the centre 
of these locomotive’s acquisition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   He was quite central. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   He is the person that the newspapers – or 
Mr Popo Molefe in his evidence here said that he replaced 
somebody 
with 
17-years’ 
experience 
with 
a 
teacher.  
Mr Jiyane is that guy who is called the teacher.   
 
He started off as a teacher but ended up with 
two degrees in business.  So it was not correct for 
Mr Popo Molefe to say that a teacher replaced the Chief 
Executive 
of 
Transnet 
Rail 
Engineering. 
 
That 
was 
Mr Jiyane. 
 
I think it is key and should be listened to by the 
20 
Commission if you really want to know what happened to 
the locomotives’ acquisitions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, all I can say is that, if he has been 
in communication with the Commission and he believes he 
has information that would be helpful to the Commission 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 205 of 265 
 
and has supplied any information or has not supplied but 
would like to supply, he should write to the Secretary or if 
he wishes to take advantage of the fact that you met each 
other recently, he gives it to you to give to your lawyers to 
send to Mr Myburgh whatever information, he may do so. 
 
All what I can say is.  There will be people who 
would have wished to come and testify that will not have 
the chance to, simply because of the reality of time.   
 
Some of the people, if they had approached us 
much earlier, they may have been accommodated but 
10 
others might not be because they may been approaching us 
late but certainly what we would want to do is look at the 
information that anybody brings and assess its importance.   
 
As we speak, we are two and a half weeks away 
from we were supposed to end with oral evidence.  So that 
– and there are a lot of people ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Gary Pita ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to try and accommodate.   
MR MOLEFE:   I will give him your cell phone number Chair 
because the Secretary is not very helpful because he has 
20 
issues.  I think it has to do with the fact that he once lost a 
tender and lost a court case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, can we say ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...speak to Mr Jiyane.  If he does not 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 206 of 265 
 
mind, then maybe if he can channel whatever documents 
through your lawyers to Mr Myburgh and then we can take 
it from there. 
MR MOLEFE:   To Mr Myburgh? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Certainly.   
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR MOLEFE:   We really thank you for the offer and we 
will make use of this offer. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   We will contact Mr Jiyane and compile all 
the information relay it to Mr Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And... the Secretary of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, thank you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Mr Molefe.  So just so 
that I understand it.  When you say that Mr Gama – 
20 
because we know that we are going to have Mr Gama here.  
We will, in time, deal with these locomotives with him but 
just so that I understand it.  You say you also go the wrong 
end of the stick? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think from reading this. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 207 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And just so that I understand it.  At 
this point in time, was presumable Mr Gama was the CEO 
of Transnet Freight Rail? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He was presumable a rail expert. 
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Gama? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, the engineers are the experts. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Gama was like me, he was a Chief 
Executive.  He was just an overhead expenditure like me. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
we 
certainly 
know 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   ...were doing the work.  The experts are the 
train drivers and the engineers. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So really Mr Callard was an expert. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, Mr Callard was not an expert. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Except the people that wrote those letters 
that say that the Mitsui locomotives were failing on the 
coal line. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Mister ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Callard, Chairperson, is also conflicted 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 208 of 265 
 
because he works for MNS, I think Fuluzi or MNS.  He was 
hired by MNS in – as part of their forensic investigation.  
And I think in the process of this Commission, he was at 
pains to explain or to show how useful he could be to the 
MNS people but he was a hired hand.  He is missionary(?). 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Molefe, what I just wanted to 
do is to carry on with this email stream or string.  If you go 
to page FQC-222. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe Mr Myburgh, we could take a 
break now.  I see we are at four o’clock.  Maybe we could 
10 
take a break.  Are we still on the understanding that we will 
continue and see how it goes?  What is your assessment of 
how much time? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I have quite a lot still to get through 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I am going to try my best to 
focus on what I consider to be the key-issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  Do you have an 
assessment of how long that might be, without saying that I 
20 
will hold you to that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I would think, probably, past 
seven o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Six, seven.  I do not know. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 209 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  I must say that for some 
reason something tells me that I may have arranged for 
some evening session this evening but hopefully I did not.  
If I did, we will see what the people ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Or perhaps you will tell us that when 
we convene. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, when we ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then we can tailor things 
accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I mean, we would like to finish today 
but if we cannot, I suppose that is not the end of the world. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, there may be that there is not, 
you know.  I do not know why I was feeling like we would 
have that problem.  So we will take the break now and then 
we will continue and see how it goes.  Okay alright.  Let us 
take a ten minutes’ break.  I am saying ten minutes.  We 
are at eighteen minutes past four.  Let us return at quarter 
past.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe, I was just dealing with 
these emails and we have dealt with Mr Gama’s email.  
Could I ask you please to go to FQC222 and you see there 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 210 of 265 
 
it appears that Mr Singh then says to Mr Gama on the 24 t h 
of January, quite early in the morning at 07H02, let us 
discuss this morning.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now we know that you then go or 
there is a memorandum that you signed, that is presented 
at a BACD meeting.  That is on the 24 t h of January, 
correct?  The same day.  
MR MOLEFE:  On the?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  24 January.  Could I ask you please 
10 
to go to page FQC244?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And this is quite a lengthy document, 
it ends at page 267. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you see that that was not signed 
by Mr Gama.  Can you explain why not?   
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot remember why Mr Gama did not 
sign.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Then let us go to the BADC 
20 
meeting on the 24 t h of January where this memorandum 
served.  Those minutes we find at FQC228.   
MR MOLEFE:  FQC228?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 211 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The attendance reflects you and Mr 
Singh as being present and partial attendance only by Mr 
Gama, correct?     
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now at this meeting on the 24 t h of 
January, were the concerns of Mr Callard and Mr Gama 
raised and discussed?   
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot remember that they were, but like I 
say, raised by who?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon?   
10 
MR MOLEFE:  I say were they raised by whom? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, did you raise them? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, those emails were not me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, but I mean the point is that the 
concerns raised by Mr Callard and Gama, were they 
discussed at this meeting, yes or no? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, no.  I cannot remember that they were.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright, thank you.  Now let us go to 
the affidavit of Mr Callard, and could I ask you please to 
turn to paragraph 49 at page FQC12? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  FQC12? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  FQC12, yes.  So Mr Callard at 
paragraph 50 at FQC12 says: 
“The minutes do not reflect that the BADC was 
informed of my concerns raised in the email 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 212 of 265 
 
correspondence.” 
And over the page at FQC13: 
 
“The minutes reflect that the BADC according 
to Mr Callard was misled by management as to 
the validity of the confinement process by one, 
creating the impression that the 26 tons heavy 
hall CSR locomotive existed when in fact this 
is not the case, using Chinese manufacturing 
facilities to motivate for speedy delivery which 
would 
have 
negated 
local 
content 
10 
requirements.  See Mr Gama’s mail in this 
regard 
and 
three, 
reporting 
that 
the 
confinement was in compliance with the PPM, 
where no previous product existed.” 
 
Do you want to comment on that?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, the Chinese had a heavy hall 
locomotive that in fact was even above the standards that 
were required.  So that is not correct and I even have a 
model of bad locomotive.  So that locomotive did exist. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright, any other comment? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  The Chinese manufacturing facilities would 
be used, because manufacturing these locomotives in 
China would give us the hundred locomotives very quickly.  
On the coal mine, which was in dire straits because the 
coal producers, so this takes us back to what I had said in 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 213 of 265 
 
the Eskom stream, because the coal producers had been 
complaining that their coal is not being taken to Richards 
bay. 
 
So we said we can get the locomotives very quickly, 
but you have to sign take or pay agreements and then 
there was an incident with Glenco and secondly the GFB, 
because we would take one hundred locomotives from the 
GFB from the coal mine GFB to revise the GFB business. 
 
So the GFB business required the locomotives and 
in as far as I am concerned, the confinement was in 
10 
compliance with the procurement procedure model. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Then you see at 53 that the 
hundred locomotives were confined to CSR. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then on the 4 t h of February Mr 
Callard receives an SMS from Mr Gama in response to his 
email of the 23 r d of January, stating I have just seen your 
email.  I would explain to you the GCE’s thinking.  He says 
that was not followed up. 
 
Of course he had seen it before because he 
20 
addressed Mr Singh in relation to it, but: 
 
“I have just seen your mail.  I will explain to 
you the GCE’s thinking.” 
 
Have you any idea what that entails?   
MR MOLEFE:  I do not know.  Maybe, I do not know.  I do 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 214 of 265 
 
not know what he was, what it was that he was going to 
explain to him, but I suspect it may be what I have just told 
you now.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why did you just not stick with 
Motsui?   
MR MOLEFE:  Because they were failing, number one.  
Number 
two, 
there 
had 
apparently 
been 
several 
confinements to them.  There had been confinements to 
them in the past and a view had been expressed that we 
should try not to have existing suppliers that have been 
10 
supplying locomotives.  
 
So they had won the tender quite a few years back 
and there had been a few confinements in between, and so 
there was a concern that we would be entrenching 
monopolies.  Yes, those are the words.  Entrenching 
monopolies by using suppliers that won a tender a few 
years ago and then we just mandate creep or scope creep. 
 
Every time we need locomotives we just confine to 
them.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So just as I understand it though, you 
20 
were in favour yourself of confinement to Motsui?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you motivated it on a series of 
ground saying it must go to Motsui. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 215 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Subsequently you were in favour of 
confinement to CSR.     
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, when ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you motivated on the same 
grounds.   
MR MOLEFE:  On the same grounds.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  
MR MOLEFE:  Because what we needed, was a hundred 
locomotives.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the only thing that caused that 
10 
as I understand it, is you say a concern was raised about 
entrenching monopolies.  
MR MOLEFE:  Entrenching monopolies.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And who raised that concern?   
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot remember but it was in the context 
of the BADC.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But had it not been for that, the 
tender would have been awarded obviously to Motsui. 
MR MOLEFE:  Might have been awarded. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
20 
MR MOLEFE:  But subsequent to that, and this I had 
forgotten.  There had been complaints that the Motsui 
locomotives had been failing and I had actually forgotten 
that until I was reminded. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  Now let us deal with another 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 216 of 265 
 
issue.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just remember not to be too far from the 
mike.   
MR MOLEFE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I want to turn then to another topic 
relating to the hundred locomotives and that is the 
increase in the ETC from 3.8 billion to 4.8 billion. 
MR MOLEFE:  From?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  3.8 to 4.8.  So the evidence seems to 
10 
be that ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If tender was awarded to CSR on the 
17 t h of March 2014, would you confirm that?  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what Mr Lehur said and he was 
part of the negotiations, he said that during negotiations 
an offer was made by Transnet of 38.5 million per loco.  
The counter offer from the suppliers was 49 million and you 
agreed then to 44 million. 
20 
 
Does that roughly accord with what you remember? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, what I remember is that the base price 
of the locomotive was 28 million per locomotive.  That was 
the base price of the locomotive. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 217 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Now the thing about locomotives, depending 
on where you buy them, is that there are other costs and 
the other costs include the, the lifetime cost of the 
locomotive, which is a cost of maintenance and maintaining 
it or the lifetime. 
 
But also the cost of financing as well as the costs 
of hedging the purchase price of the locomotives.  So in 
this instance and in the other instances as well, our 
preference was to get a fixed price.  Fixed price means 
irrespective of what happens, there is exchange rates to 
10 
interest rates and to inflation. 
 
This is the price that we will pay.  So if we are not 
entering into a contract where after a few, a few years or 
even a few months a supplier will turn around and say you 
know that the price three months ago.  Since then the price 
of steel has gone up, interest rates, differential between 
the countries.   
 
Our countries is widened and that the exchange 
rate as you can see has moved.  So we prefer the fixed 
price.  Now when you go for fixed price, typically the 
20 
suppliers would make you pay for it, and this differed and 
was a subject of negotiation.   
 
So the important thing is to know that the base 
price was 28 million and then the other fields put it up and 
those other fields would differ depending on where you 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 218 of 265 
 
buy.  You are buying from China and buying from Japan 
and buying from America is not, the thrills are not the 
same.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  But what was comparable is the base price. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe, what happened then 
according to Mr Lehur. 
MR MOLEFE:  According to mister? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Lehur. 
MR MOLEFE:  Lehur.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that Mr Singh requested him to 
prepare a memorandum explaining why the price had 
increased from the business case submission, effectively 
to justify what had been agreed, and then he went on to 
say that on the 23 r d of May 2014 you approved the 
memorandum to the Board of Directors for an increase in 
the ETC from 3.8 to 4.8. 
 
Let me take you to this document that Mr Lehur 
prepared together or an instruction of Mr Singh.  That you 
find in Exhibit BB4(f) and then 2.  So it is quite a 
20 
complicated ... BB4, you will find in Exhibit BB4(f).   I do 
not have [indistinct – 00:14:59] and then it is second 
space.   
 
Alright.  So it is BBf, sorry BB4(f) and then there 
are more than one statement in that bundle.  It is the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 219 of 265 
 
second statement and that is why it is BB4(f2).  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And I would like to go to page 46, in 
fact the memo starts at 47.   
MR MOLEFE:  46?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  YLRESP, 47.  So hopefully we all 
have the same thing.  Mr Molefe, do you have there a 
memorandum at 47 to the Transnet board from yourself? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And if we go to page YLRESP60, 
10 
there you find the signature page.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And that reflects that you, it was 
recommended by you on the 23 r d of May 2014, correct?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, by Mr Gama and Mr Singh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja, you are correct.  Mr Singh, so it 
is three levels of recommendation.  Mr Singh, Mr Gama and 
yourself.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I thought you said page 60.  
Mr Myburgh?   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It starts at page 47 and the 
document, the memorandum is signed Chairperson, at page 
60.  YLRESP060.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe this is the wrong file.  I think, is 
that 
the 
memo 
that 
on 
page 
60 
has 
the 
heading 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 220 of 265 
 
methodology of scoring and meetings held, on page 60.  Is 
that the one?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The memorandum that we are looking 
at, starts at page 47 Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think I do not think ... let us get, 
what is the bundle.  Is it Exhibit BB4(f)? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  BB4(f), yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, and what is the page?  If you just 
tell me the page, not the exhibit number.  Just the page.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The page is 47, but there is two 
10 
dividers.  There is a first statement and a second 
statement.  One needs to get to the second statement, 
because it does not seem to be consecutively numbered.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, is that so?  I think that is what 
maybe ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is not sequential.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Not throughout the file, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure of the file.  Okay, so I must 
go to behind, after the second divider? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, the dividers are numbered.  There 
is one, two, three, four, five.  So is it the second one?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In fact mine are numbered differently 
so, perhaps I could ask my ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 221 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let me ... let me see where is, this 
is 
the 
reason 
why 
I 
have 
been 
insisting 
that 
the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe has divider number 25.  Do 
you have a 25 Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The bundle or the divider? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Divider number 25.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me see.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Or it is Exhibit 25.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is why I insisted the pagination 
10 
should be sequential from the first page of the bundle up to 
the end, so that when anybody says page so and so, then 
we all know there will only be one such page.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You will remember Chairperson, it 
seems that this was in the very early days of the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Now I think I, there is a memo 
here at page 47.  This is page YLRESP047. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the one? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  So this is the memorandum 
that we have been speaking of and what I have done, is I 
had taken you to the signature page just so that DCJ can, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 222 of 265 
 
Chairperson can see now that he has, we all have the 
document.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At YLRSP060 ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There is the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I have got it now.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There is the recommendation by the 
three of you Mr Singh, Mr Gama and yourself, and the 
recommendation 89(b) at the end, is the BOD approves an 
10 
increase in the estimated total cost for the acquisition of 
the hundred equivalent class 19E dual voltage electric 
locomotives or the export coal line from 3.87 billion to 
4.840 billion. 
 
You confirm that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Now evidence has been 
given by Mr Callard to the effect that this increase of a 
billion rand was excessive and unjustifiable.  You know of 
that evidence?   
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, I may have seen it in the papers, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And also, perhaps more importantly, 
there was the evidence of an expert in the form of Mr Tjabi 
who also testified that the increase was excessive and 
unjustifiable.  Have you seen that evidence? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 223 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Both from MNS?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what Mr Tjabi said and we can go 
to his report, is that an increase to 4.1 billion from 3.8 was 
reasonable but he considered the additional 800 million to 
be not justifiable.  Have you seen that evidence? 
MR MOLEFE:  No.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, let me take you to that.  You 
were I think previously given this, but where you will find 
it, if you will just give me a second ... is in Exhibit BB8(b). 
MR MOLEFE:  Come again, which ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So it is BB8(b) and that is divided 
into point 1 and point 2.  There are two reports by Mr Tjabi 
contained in BB8(b).   
MR MOLEFE:  Ja.  Which page number?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Chairperson, do you have Exhibit 
BB8(b)?  Then you have a point 1 and point 2.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got BB8(b) point 1 and (b) point 2.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is right.  If I could take you 
please to, if you could please go to (b) point 2.  It is the 
second report in that file, right towards the end.   
20 
MR MOLEFE:  What is the page number? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And it starts, the first page of Mr 
Tjabi’s report is page and these are only red numbers 
AOC100001.   
MR MOLEFE:  100 001?   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 224 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is actually the first page, not ... Mr 
Molefe, you have the report?  It starts at page 1, are you 
there?   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Yes, I have got it.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have previously been provided 
with this and you have seen this before.  
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot say that I have, but ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  It was actually in fact 
attached to your, it is one of the annexures to the request 
for you to file an affidavit.  
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But let us not worry about that for the 
moment.  Are you at page 1?  
MR MOLEFE:  Ja, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I ask you to turn to page 20?  
Under the heading conclusion at 5.33 in concluding, having 
built up the price of the E20 dual voltage electric 
locomotives provided by CSR as at April 2012 to March 
2014, allowed for design modification costs as at March 
2014 
to 
meet 
Transnet’s 
19E 
dual 
voltage 
electric 
20 
locomotive requirements and mitigated for risks such as 
foreign 
currency 
and 
inflation, 
a 
reasonable 
stroke 
acceptable price ETC for the transaction would have been 
4.1 billion. 
 
The excess of 739 million could not be justified on 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 225 of 265 
 
the basis as explained above.  Have you got any comment 
on that?   
MR MOLEFE:  He is talking rubbish.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  Let us then and why do you 
say that?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, let me come to why I say that.  
Chairperson, if you look at the memorandum in RESP049, 
paragraph 22, it says: 
 
“A, 
forex 
movements 
from 
the 
approved 
10 
business case to the award date.” 
 
So the reasons for the increase in ETC, inflationary 
related escalations, variations to design for a higher 
specification, the cost of fixing future escalations over the 
life of the contract.  So this is from the time that the 
contract is entered into for the life of the contract, and it 
says: 
 
“Forward looking risk mitigation.” 
 
And then it says: 
 
“Cost of fixing forex exposure, forward looking 
20 
risk mitigation.” 
 
And it says: 
 
“Contingencies 
related 
to 
variation 
orders.  
Contingencies related to variation orders as 
part of the negotiation process, a further 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 226 of 265 
 
discount of 2.2.4 million per locomotive was 
negotiated.” 
 
Now my point is, in arriving at the figure based on 
what is in the memorandum, assumptions would have to be 
made.  So when you say that forward looking, we have to 
make assumptions.  From one economist to the other, the 
assumptions will not be the same.  
 
Even if the assumptions are the same, they will not 
arrive at the same …[audio cut] … that is just how it is.  
That is how, so the risk mitigation and calculations for risk 
10 
like this, forward looking, is not a science.  It is an art.  So 
you cannot calculate it to the cent, because it is about 
assumption.  So what he did, is that he came up with his 
own assumption and arrived at another number.  
 
The people that would be in this memo and that were 
doing this calculation here, had other assumptions, perhaps 
even the same assumptions but different parameters and 
variables in their assumptions, and by definition they came 
with a different numbers.  
 
That cannot be imputed to mean impropriety.  It is 
20 
just that if you took, take two risk, risk specialists and you 
put them in one room or in two separate rooms, and give 
them the same things, and ask them to calculate a forward 
looking price, they will come at different numbers.  
 
They will arrive at different numbers and part of 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 227 of 265 
 
what influences them, part of what influences them are 
subjective factors.  Subjective factors.  I mean it comes at 
the 
point 
where, 
even 
what 
they 
had 
for 
breakfast 
influences what their feeling is about a particular issue on 
that particular day.  
 
So this is not a science.  I noticed yesterday when 
you were explaining the meaning of ETC, the E in ETC is 
estimated and the thing about estimated, is that if I asked 
everybody in this room to estimate anything, we will not 
have the same number.  So it is not a science, it is an art.  
10 
Estimation is an art.  
 
So this is the work of two artists.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course, of course even if you are 
talking simply about estimating anything.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  There will be parameters.  You say if 
somebody says what is, what do you estimate what the 
price will be of that bottle in front of you, if somebody 
suddenly says a particular figure, everyone will say no, that 
is just out.  
20 
 
So but if there would be certain amounts, if people 
give different amounts within a certain range, it is taken 
that that is reasonable.  You accept that?   
MR MOLEFE:  No Chair.  We were in class when the 
lecturer demonstrated this, and he took a wine glass. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 228 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MOLEFE:  And he filled it with tic-tacs, small sweets 
and we were about 15 in class, and he says please walk 
around this wine glass and estimate the number of sweets, 
and write down your estimate.  From 15 people, the range 
valued from about 75 to 400.   
 
He says that is your lecture 
for the day on 
estimation.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but maybe we should not spend too 
much time on this.  I mean ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:  It does not mean anything, because what you 
do not know is what is in fact the wine glass.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no what I am saying is it might differ 
in terms of what you are talking about, but if somebody is 
going to come and say they estimate that bottle in front of 
you to cost R20 000-00, you know many people are going to 
say that is completely out.   
 
Just an empty bottle you know, so it might depend 
on a number, but if they say maybe R50-00, R20-00 you say 
maybe that is within a certain range, R5-00, R10-00, but 
20 
there comes a time when you say but that is too out.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, I just really wanted to make the 
point that Mr Tjabi is an expert.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 229 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Tjabi is an expert? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, he gave expert evidence and you 
have seen his report before.  
MR MOLEFE:  Is he expert to you?  I mean, I do not 
consider his work to be the work of an expert.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you were given this report before. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You did not go to your own expert to 
10 
get a contrary view, you just want us to accept that look, 
this is an art, not a science?  I mean that is essentially 
what you want the Chairperson to do.  
MR MOLEFE:  That is what I am saying.  I am saying that 
the estimation is an art, not a science.  So Mr Tjabi cannot 
come here with definite numbers when all he did was 
estimate.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Have you got anything else 
to say about Mr Tjabi’s expert opinion? 
MR MOLEFE:  No.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I just want to take you to something in 
your ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember to speak not too far from the 
mike. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon Chairperson. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 230 of 265 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 5. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Exhibit B22.  I just want to take you 
please to the Regulation 10(6) notice, which you will find at 
page 12, or sorry page 14, black numbers.   
MR MOLEFE:  Bundle 5, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 5, Exhibit 22. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page and now we are referring to the 
10 
black numbers on the left hand side, page 14.   
MR MOLEFE:  One four? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There, perhaps I can ask you to turn 
to page 17 and I would like to refer to paragraph 1.6.  Just 
to confirm that you were asked about the opinion of Alistair 
Tjabi, at page 17, that the increase in the ETC of a hundred 
locomotives from 3.8, I paraphrase to 4.8 was unjustified, 
your attention being drawn to his statement dated the 26 t h 
20 
of November 2019, Exhibit BB8(b)2.  
 
You were given this report? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right, and whilst we are on that, 
there is something I have wanted to ask you some time ago.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 231 of 265 
 
If you have a look at paragraph 1.9 on the opposite page, 
page 18, you see there you were asked a series of 
questions about McKinsey and Regiments.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sub one, the confinement and 
appointment 
of 
the 
consortium 
including 
McKinsey, 
Letsema, etcetera. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then the decision to replace Letsema.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And Nedbank with Regiments.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The session and the payment of the 
78 million, things we have gone through already.  The 
confinement and the appointment at paragraph 194 of 
McKinsey on those four contracts that you were involved in. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And also the confinement and award 
of the GFB breakthrough. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Those are things that you have 
already dealt with in a lot of detail. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But what I wanted to ask you Mr 
Molefe, is where do we find in your affidavit your response 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 232 of 265 
 
to all of these issues dealing with the McKinsey and 
Regiment contracts?  Your affidavit we know, starts at page 
28 of Bundle 5, Exhibit BB22.   
 
There is your affidavit.  Perhaps you could just page 
through it.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, Bundle 5 you said? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no I did not realise it is right in 
10 
front of me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It has been a long day Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It has been a long day.  Did you say 22?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To 28 is Mr Molefe’s affidavit.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So unless I have it wrong and you can 
correct me, you do not deal with McKenzie or Regiments at 
all, or do you?   
MR MOLEFE:  No, I do not.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You do not? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  No, I do not.  I think that it was an error 
Chairperson.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let us ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  And please, remember that this was the 20 t h, 
the 12 t h day of November 2020 and this notice required us 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 233 of 265 
 
or me to deal with this, with all of these issues within seven 
weeks, and then on the same day there was another 
directive that said that, which was an Eskom directive, 
which required me to deal with quite substantial issues 
within 30 days.  
 
On top of that Chairperson, I am actually a student.  
It was in the middle of my exams.  If I put away all of these 
directives, and finished my exams, then I was under 
pressure to finish the 30 day directive.  I even think I asked 
for an extension. 
10 
 
While I was still busy dealing with it, there was a 
subpoena to appear on the 15 t h of January.  The subpoena 
came with its own issues and the 15 t h of January was about 
the same time as, as this affidavit was due.  So there was a 
lot of pressure and what I did is I dealt with it to the best of 
my ability, and I must apologise if in the process I may have 
neglected to deal with the McKinsey issues.  
 
However, having said that, I would hope that my 
dealing with the issues today, was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was adequate? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Give them justice, yes.  I hope that we dealt 
with them adequately and that there is nothing that I have 
said today that I would not have said, had I had sufficient 
time to prepare and finalize my affidavit properly. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe just understand, that in 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 234 of 265 
 
your affidavit nowhere do you say that there is certain 
topics that I have not dealt with or I have not had enough 
time.  
UNKNOWN:  Chairperson, if I can be helpful in this regard? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
UNKNOWN:  The Regulation 10(6) notice that was brought 
to our attention, which was signed by the Chairperson dated 
the 12 t h of November 2020, has specific areas which 
required Mr Molefe to prepare his affidavit on and this 
Regulation 10(6) notice makes no reference to McKenzie. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not be having the right one.  
The one that Mr Myburgh referred to, does have reference, 
you might be looking at the wrong one.  I think Mr Molefe 
had it, I had it and ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, I think my learned friend perhaps 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr, we might not be on the same page 
literally.  Mr Molefe was issued with two different, two 10(6) 
directives.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am referring to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Apart from the Eskom one ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he also said he got ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 235 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am referring to the second one.  
CHAIRPERSON:  [indistinct – 00:14:25] once.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you might be having one, one of them 
but not the one he was referring to.   
UNKNOWN:  Okay, thanks Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright, well let us leave it at that.  So 
just so that I understand it Mr Molefe, before we move on.  
Did you then forget to deal with McKenzie Regiments or did 
you deliberately not deal with it because you did not have 
10 
enough time?   
MR MOLEFE:  I think I did not deal with it because I did not 
have time.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yet you did not mention that in the 
affidavit? 
MR MOLEFE:  But as you may have noticed from the way 
that I have dealt with it today, had I had time to deal with it, 
I would have dealt with it exactly as I dealt with it today.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Could I then please take you 
to Exhibit 27?  That is Bundle 6.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we going to go back to PSB any time 
soon or can I ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No, I do not think we are Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so they can take it away.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I take you please to page 117 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 236 of 265 
 
of that exhibit, Exhibit 27 in Bundle 6?  This is the Fundudzi 
report.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just for the record, that is Transnet 
Bundle C and it is at page 177?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  117.   
CHAIRPERSON:  117, thank you.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Are you there Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I would just like to draw your attention 
to some paragraphs in this report.  It starts on page 117 
10 
with paragraph 5.6.4.8.  Are you there?  In about the middle 
of the page.  Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It says: 
“That from Motui’s July 2013 proposal we 
determined 
that 
their 
ETC 
for 
119 
E 
locomotives was 3.188 billion.  ETC included 
all costs.  Motui indicated that there were not 
going to be any escalation costs except for 
material, steel [indistinct – 00:18:50].” 
20 
You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you have any comment on that?   
MR MOLEFE:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then ...[intervenes]  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 237 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  I have no comment, other than to say that 
price was not the reason why we did not go for Motui as I 
said.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then at paragraph 5.6.4.11, at the 
top of page 118, you say: 
 
“Based on our calculations we determined that 
the total ETC of 3.8 billion was based on 112 
locomotives at an estimated cost of 34.34 
million per locomotive.  As discussed below ...” 
 
The next sub paragraph: 
10 
 
“We noted that the number of locomotives was 
reduced to one hundred without reducing the 
ETC of 3.8 billion.  It should have been 
reduced to 3.4 billion.” 
 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, I have no comment.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If you go over the page please to 119, 
at paragraph 5.6.4.18: 
 
“Based 
on 
documentation, 
it 
should 
have 
reduced the ETC from 3.8 billion to 3.4 billion 
20 
in line with the reduced number of locomotives 
from 112 to a hundred.” 
 
I think we have already dealt with that.  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then towards the bottom of the page, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 238 of 265 
 
the third last paragraph, paragraph 5.6.4.20.3: 
 
“Sharma, the Chairperson of the BA ...” 
 
That should presumably be BC: 
 
“Was 
comfortable 
with 
the 
business 
plan.  
However he requested consideration of other 
alternatives to the proposed consignment.” 
 
So was it Mr Sharma that requested that?  That 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot quite recall exactly who it was.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But it could have been him? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that ...[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot quite recall exactly who it was.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You cannot presumably rule out that it 
was Mr Sharma? 
MR MOLEFE:  It could have been. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then over the page, page 120.  The 
fourth paragraph, paragraph 5.6.4.20.9: 
 
“Sharma 
later 
supported 
the 
confinement 
through CSR and did not raise that confinement 
20 
would affect competition.” 
MR MOLEFE:  5.6.4.20? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Point 9.  So he supported the 
confinement to CSR.  Well, presumably he must have 
because he was the Chairperson of the BADC. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 239 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  And I would also presume that he was not 
the only one.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  Then if we can go over the 
page, page 121.  Paragraph 5.6.5.2: 
 
“We determined that on 11 October 2013 Singh, 
Mohammed, 
Peter 
and 
Gama 
signed 
a 
memorandum of submission to BADC for the 
approval 
of 
acquisition 
of 
one 
hundred 
locomotives through a confinement to Motui.  
We noted that the memorandum was dated 15 
10 
October 2013 although it was signed on 11 
October 2013.  We determined that Molefe did 
not sign the said memorandum.” 
 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja, I cannot recall why I would not have 
signed it, and perhaps ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if we can ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:  Because, because the standard practice is 
that if I do not approve, I say so.  That it is not approved.  
So if something is brought, I either approve or I do not 
20 
approve or as in the case of that memo with Ms Makgatho, I 
say noted or I make a comment.  
 
But that I did not even express an opinion or sign at 
all, I cannot recall what the reason was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I take you then please to page 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 240 of 265 
 
123, and to the heading the BADC of 21 October, and let me 
draw your attention to the last two paragraphs.  Paragraph 
5.6.7.2: 
 
“We determined that the memorandum dated 15 
October 2013 as reflected above was discussed 
at the BADC meeting on 21 October 2013.” 
 
Sub one, or let me take you to sub two: 
 
“[indistinct – 00:23:50] sought clarity on the 
withdrawal 
of 
the 
hundred 
locomotives 
submission from the agenda as the committee 
10 
had requested it to be tabled, due to urgency of 
the transaction.” 
 
Do you have any recollection of that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot recall that this was discussed in the 
formal meeting and I cannot recall who raised it.  I do recall 
something like this, but I remember just thinking that look, 
this is not something that we should involve ourselves in, 
and that we need to decide whether we are going with Motui 
or not, and we have to find reasons why we are not going 
with Motui if we are not going with Motui and why we could 
20 
go with CSI. 
 
Ja, I just remember vaguely this allegation and I 
cannot recall that it was in the formal meeting.  So I do not 
know if it is in the minutes or whether it was raised on the 
side of the meeting, but there was I think in the township 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 241 of 265 
 
they call it [indistinct – 00:25:07].  
 
The people just talking about this and not really 
coming forward.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Gossip? 
MR MOLEFE:  Gossip yes, gossip.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR MOLEFE:  It is not even saying here who raised that 
issue.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I then please take you to page 
124. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At the top, paragraph 5.6.7.2.3: 
 
“Management represented by Molefe, Singh, 
Peter, Difito and Mosia, indicated that upon 
reflection they opted to withdraw the matter 
after 
considering 
that 
when 
the 
initiatory 
confinement was made in 2010 there were 
press reports alleging that the company Motui 
had entered into a 1.4 billion locomotive 
procurement secret deal.” 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Sorry, where are you reading?  Which 
paragraph? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The first paragraph at the top of page 
124.  
MR MOLEFE:  124? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 242 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So they indicated that they opted to 
withdraw, because after the initial confinement there were 
press reports, alleging that Motsui had entered into a 1.4 
billion 
locomotive 
procurement 
secret 
deal 
that 
was 
concluded without being put out to tender, which the then 
special advisor to the former Deputy President Mohlante 
was said to benefit from. 
MR MOLEFE:  Who said this? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, it says management represented 
by Molefe, Singh, Peter, Difito indicated that upon reflection 
10 
they opted to withdraw because of this.  
MR MOLEFE:  Well, I was never a part of talking about that 
secret deal. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then at paragraph 5.6.7.2.6: 
 
“During 
our 
consultation 
with 
Callard 
he 
indicated that on 21 October 2013, Molefe 
withdrew 
the 
hundred 
locomotives 
memorandum.” 
 
Correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then sub paragraph 8 under that: 
 
“During 
our 
consultation 
with 
Gama, 
he 
confirmed 
that 
Molefe 
withdrew 
the 
said 
memorandum.  Gama further indicated that the 
reason 
why 
Molefe 
did 
not 
sign 
the 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 243 of 265 
 
memorandum of 15 October 2013 was because 
he had changed his mind and did not want 
Transnet 
to 
confine 
the 
acquisition 
of 
a 
hundred locomotives through Motsui.” 
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot comment on that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Next sub paragraph: 
 
“As 
reflected 
above, 
one 
of 
the 
reasons 
advanced not to confine to Motsui, was the 
alleged 
negative 
publicity 
relating 
to 
allegations of links between Motsui and a 
10 
special 
advisor 
to 
the 
former 
Deputy 
President.” 
 
Any comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, I cannot comment on that.  I, ja I cannot 
comment on that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  “During our consultation ...” 
 
The next sub paragraph: 
 
“With Giyane, he indicated that the allegation 
against 
the 
special 
advisor 
to 
the 
former 
President Mohlante was never investigated at 
20 
the time the motivation to Motsui was rejected 
by the BADC.” 
 
Do you want to comment on that? 
WITNESS:  Yes, that is true that it was never investigated.  
I am not aware that there was an investigation. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 244 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In the next sub paragraph: 
 
“In his response to our questions relating to the 
memorandum of 11 October 2013, Sharma 
stated that your finding at the BADC meeting of 
21 October 2013 deliberated and rejected, the 
submission is incorrect as the matter did not 
serve before the committee meeting.  The 
minutes which you are in possession of did not 
support your finding.” 
 
Any comment on that? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Well, the minutes would reflect exactly what 
happened at the meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then sub 13, two paragraphs 
below that.  They say: 
 
“It 
cannot 
be 
a 
coincidence 
that 
the 
memorandum that Molefe did not sign on 15 
October was the same memorandum that the 
BADC rejected in its meeting of 21 October 
2013.  It is further not a coincidence that the 
BADC rejected the confinement through Motsui.  
20 
The recommendation to which Molefe did not 
sign prior to the presentation to BADC.” 
 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well, ja.  This is now become stranger than 
fiction.  So there was a memorandum that I did not sign, 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 245 of 265 
 
that never the less …[audio cut] BADC is that – I do not 
know is that what happened because if I had not signed it it 
could not have gone to BADC and if it did it would have been 
irregular. And as I have said before that memorandum was 
not signed and it did not indicate whether I disapproved or 
approved or had reservations.  I did not give reasons.  A 
normal practice would have been for me to sign but then 
indicate, bring the matter to finality one way or another. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright and then if I can move onto… 
MR MOLEFE:  So – so if it was a memorandum that I had not 
10 
signed it is a memorandum that does not exist. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now I want to move on to page 126. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Under the heading Memorandum to 
confine through CSR dated 21 January which we have dealt 
with and go to paragraph 5.6.8.10 the second last one on 
that page. 
“We determined that after Singh received the 
memorandum from Gama he either changed 
it or had it changed from a confinement to 
20 
Mitsui to a confinement to CSR.  This is 
based on the fact that a confinement of the 
said document signed by Singh and Molefe 
on 21 January 2014 and 22 January 2014 
respectively had the name of the entity for 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 246 of 265 
 
confinement changed from Mitsui to CSR.” 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think you have accepted that. 
MR MOLEFE:  So whilst it was determined that we are not 
going through Mitsui with Mitsui as I say the business case 
did not change.  So the business case for getting 100 
locomotives for the coal line was still there and so the 
reasons were still the same. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then the last paragraph on page 
126, 5.6.8.11 
10 
“Gama 
indicated 
that 
the 
memorandum 
presented by BADC sorry to BADC by Molefe 
to confine through CSR did not originate from 
TFR.” 
Could you take issue with that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I – I cannot comment on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well where did it originate from? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the – the paragraph before says that it 
was the same as the Mitsui memorandum. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  So the business case for the 100 locomotives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes no we know that. 
MR MOLEFE:  It comes from TFR. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes but then there was a change from 
Mitsui to CSR. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 247 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja it was a change in the party. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And not in the … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Who affected that change? 
MR MOLEFE:  I think it was between myself and Mr Singh.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes well precisely. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It did not originate from TFR. 
MR MOLEFE:  No the origin – well – well maybe … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  We do not understand each other because … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No I think we perhaps do on this 
occasion. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  Ja the memorandum for Mitsui was a – a 
motivation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  For the acquisition. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct. 
 MR MOLEFE:  Of 100 locomotives. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  And that came from TFR. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  That came from TFR.  In that sense it 
originated from TFR. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But what did not come from TFR was 
the motivation for confinement to CSR. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 248 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that is what I am saying here. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  That was done by Mr Singh and 
you as you say.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He further stated that he made the said 
conclusion based on the fact that none of the TFR officials 
signed it and further that TFR recommended a confinement 
through Mitsui and not CSR.  I presume there is not an issue 
there. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And so… 
MR MOLEFE:  So now Mr … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I forget your name now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Myburgh. 
MR MOLEFE:  Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is late in the day. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Molefe. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, yes.  As I say over the weekend I got 
things that jogged my memory and these are reports from 
engineers. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not speak away from the microphone. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 249 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  I said as I say that I got things that jogged my 
memory and these are reports that came from the engineers 
that the Mitsui amongst others – the Mitsui locomotives had 
been failing.  But this was 2000 and – 2000 – was it 2013? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  14. 
MR MOLEFE:  14 the tender had been awarded in 2010 and 
between – for fourteen years in between there had been 
confinements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Four years you mean you said 2010 – 
2014. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  No it was not 2010 it was – it happened for 
quite a long time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said the award was made in 2010. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I made a mistake. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this was 2014. 
MR MOLEFE:  It was before that.  It was before 2010.  But 
for quite a number of years and I cannot remember exactly 
when it was awarded I can find that out.  For quite a number 
of years the – the tender had been awarded quite a long time 
ago and in between there had been confinements.  Ja so 
20 
there was this issue of entrenched monopoly number 1 and 
number 2 the locomotives had been failing.   
 
Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright and then if we could go please 
to page 127 paragraph 5.6.8.12 the top of the page.  You will 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 250 of 265 
 
see that the recorded that: 
“Gama indicated that he found out for the first time that the 
confinement was changed from Mitsui to CSR when he was 
at the BADC meeting of 24 January. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I cannot comment on that.  That is what 
Gama said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I see.  And then if you go to page 129 
towards the middle of the page at paragraph 5.6.9.3 this is 
Mr Jiyane the gentleman you mentioned.  According to 
Jiyane 
10 
“The confinement of the 100 locomotives to 
CSR was brought to his attention by Singh on 
24 January 2014 before their attendance to 
BADC meeting of the said day.” 
MR MOLEFE:  I cannot… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   
“Mr Jiyane and Singh – Jiyane and Gama.” 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja I cannot comment on that.  Is that what 
Jiyane says? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.   
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja I cannot comment on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But it is – it is consistent with the fact 
that – that you and Mr Singh were involved in changing the 
name as I understand it. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 251 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Late in the day. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So it is possible that these people did 
not know about this? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is possible but I cannot comment on it.  I 
cannot say for sure that that was indeed the case. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But if you could understand this – this 
is Mr Gama the CEO of TFR. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right and Mr Jiyane occupies what 
10 
position at this time? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well this is not them saying it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But what position did Mr Jiyane 
occupy? 
MR MOLEFE:  No this is not them saying it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But it is recorded as them saying it. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is – it is – who was it?  MNS. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Saying that they said so. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  So I would rather that they come here 
and say so. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So… 
MR MOLEFE:  So let us wait for their evidence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright but I need to of course then… 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 252 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Because – because what – I think because 
this is what – what MNS says they said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But further Mr Molefe that I understand 
but you will appreciate that if we had to run that way the 
commission would never come to an end.  I need to put to 
you what they found and we are going to get Mr Gama here 
you know and we will deal with this. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I would rather that I – I am not accused of 
things. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Surely. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  In the interest of time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am not accusing you of anything.  I 
am simply saying… 
MR MOLEFE:  No that… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To you. 
MR MOLEFE:  No just saying that – well Mr Gama was the 
CEO of TFR and he did not know about it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Now I must comment on it and as I say I 
cannot but Mr Gama will come here and he will have an 
20 
opportunity to find out exactly what … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let me put the question another way.  
Are you … 
MR MOLEFE:  If Mr Gama repeats this and confirms it as 
true then it is fine then I can come back and answer to it. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 253 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Are you – are you able to help the 
Chairperson with the question of whether you think Mr Gama 
knew about the change before the BADT meeting do you 
know whether he knew yourself? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well that is something that would have been 
internal to Mr Gama.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is difficult for me to say.  And he is the best 
person placed to talk about that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When you changed the business case 
10 
you and Mr Singh the – from Mitsui to CSR did you tell Mr 
Singh that he should distribute that business case to Gama 
and Jiyane? 
MR MOLEFE:  As I say we have reports here that say that 
the locomotives were failing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No that is not my question Mr – please 
Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh sorry what was your question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  My question is when you – when you 
affected the change you and Mr Singh. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To the business case the name – the 
party Mitsui to CSR did you tell Mr Singh that he must send 
that revision or new case to Gama and Jiyane? 
MR MOLEFE:  No I think – I think there was a discussion.  
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 254 of 265 
 
We felt that the fact that we were not going to get the Mitsui 
locomotives and that the TFR people were happy with the 
Mitsui locomotives we would put the market demand strategy 
at risk.  I was explaining yesterday to the Chairperson that 
the – the funding of the MDS 70% of it had to come from 
operations – from improved operations.  This exercise would 
have improved the volumes and operations by injecting 100 
locomotives and into the coal line improving the efficiency of 
the coal line and taking the old coal line locomotives and 
putting them onto the GFB business and improving volumes 
10 
and generating revenue of to fund the MDS.   
 
So in deciding on the confinement we had to do 
something that was practical and that could work.  The fact 
that we were going to buy a re-confined to an entrenched 
monopoly and when there had been reports that the 
locomotives are failing may not have helped our case. 
 
So the concern was to move with speed so that we 
can improve the operations of the business and generate the 
money that we need for the MDS. 
 
The 
MDS 
was 
not 
just 
about 
rail 
I 
see 
the 
20 
commission’s concern is just rail but there were – the MDS 
included the ports, it included the pipelines, it included a 
project to manufacture our own locomotive that would be 
made in South Africa.  In – in business – in – not business 
development but in technology development at CSIR so we 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 255 of 265 
 
needed the money desperately to make the MDS a reality. 
 
And I remember having this meeting with Mr Singh 
and saying we must just decide and move on. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So do you feel you have answered my 
question? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But my question had nothing to do with 
that at all.   
MR MOLEFE:  Oh it did not. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It has been a long day. 
MR MOLEFE:  What was it about? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It was a very simple question and that 
is when you changed the party in the confinement/ 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In the business case from Mitsui to 
CSR you and Singh did you tell this to Singh that he must 
send that new thing – that new document to Jiyane and 
Gama? 
MR MOLEFE:  No. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is all it is. 
MR MOLEFE:  My answer was it was a discussion and I gave 
you the context. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But when you – when you told us about 
your discussion now right at the end you said you had a 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 256 of 265 
 
discussion with Singh you never mentioned Gama. 
MR MOLEFE:  Did you say – when I – when I had a 
discussion with Singh did I talk about Gama? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no he – he – the question was Mr 
Molefe after you and Mr Singh had changed the case. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From Mitsui to CSR. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ask Mr Singh – instruct Mr Singh – 
10 
tell Mr Singh to share that document with Mr Gama and 
whoever else? 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja did you do that?  Did you – ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Shared with – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  No I cannot recall that – I cannot recall that 
we did that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  Alright.  So then I have taken 
you to paragraph 5.6..3 at page 129 let us go to the next 
20 
paragraph. 
“Jiyane further indicated that he was not 
provided with the memorandum to confine to 
CSR before the BABC meeting held on 24 
January.” 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 257 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  5.6.9.3? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  5.6.9.3 it is just below. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He says: 
“He was not provided with it and according to 
Jiyana had a glimpse of the memorandum 
confining to CSR after Singh presented it to 
the BADC.” 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I think… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Any comment on that? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  I think that this is what MNS is saying about 
Jiyane and I would rather that he comes here and explains. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then I must then put to you 
perhaps finally in that regard two paragraphs below that 
6.5.9.6 
“Jiyane indicated that he was not certain that 
CSR could manufacture the 19E locomotives 
as required by TFR because they had not 
supplied the 19E locomotives to TFR before.” 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson Jiyane would have to come here 
20 
and on this one I am quite confident that he would disagree 
with MNS that this is what he said. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then two last paragraphs if I may 
at page 130 in the middle of the page paragraph 5.6.9.10. 
“We determine that as per the procurement 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 258 of 265 
 
procedures manual version 2 October 2013 
requirement the end user in this case TFR 
should 
be 
the 
one 
motivating 
the 
procurement 
process 
to 
be 
followed 
ie 
confinement 
or 
tender 
before 
the 
memorandum may be taken to Transnet 
Group for recommendation to be BADC.  We 
determine that Gama and Jiyane as the end 
users did not motivate with the confinement 
of 100 locomotives to CSR.” 
10 
You did and Mr Singh did. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What is your response to this? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would rather Jiyane and Gama answer when 
they come here and … 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But this is not – this is not a Gama and 
Jiyane thing.  You have accepted that you and Singh 
motivated. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The point is that what MNS is saying is 
20 
that is in breach of the PPM. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja Chairperson this may have been an 
oversight on our side. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  An oversight not to include the people 
from TFR? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 259 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  On – on the – the need for the locomotives 
had been determined. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then let us go to the last 
paragraph I want to take you to 5.6.9.11. 
“We determined that paragraph 15.1.5 of the 
2013 PPM states that “the submission for 
confinement 
must 
be 
fully 
motivated 
in 
writing by the end user and the operational 
10 
division Chief Procurement Officer TFR to 
operational divisions main acquisition council 
AC 
and 
the 
operations 
division 
Chief 
Executive Officer for prior written support of 
the 
recommendation 
to 
confine. 
 
The 
submission 
should 
be 
submitted 
on 
the 
relevant template undercover of a memo.” 
Any comment on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  This is the 2013 PPM.   Ja it may well have 
said so but as we discussed earlier it also said other things. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you think this may have been an 
oversight as you have said? 
MR MOLEFE:  Come again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have said it could have been an 
oversight as you put it? 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 260 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja it could have been an oversight but now 
reading this if the reliance was on the 2013 PPM what I am 
saying is that MNS is quoting this part of the PPM but not – 
does not quote the sections that we were dealing with earlier 
of the PPM that allowed for exactly what happened in the 
end. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If I may just take us – a moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you talking about your power? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Your 
power 
to 
approve 
without 
a 
10 
recommendation? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  That was in the 2013 PPM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  As we discussed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought Mr Myburgh said Mr Volmink’s 
point in regard to that was that you only had that power in 
cases where you are dealing with a confidential confinement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes absolutely. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not just a normal confinement if I can 
put it that way. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 261 of 265 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this – this one – was this one not – is 
the position that here you were not dealing with confidential 
confinement? 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja perhaps Chairperson that technicality 
could be sustained. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Of course one is dealing here with the 
high volume or high value contract – massive contract, 
correct? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright let us then move on to the 
procurement of the 1064 locomotives. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes Chairperson I have a request and my 
request is that I am really exhausted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is understandable. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I do not think that I will do the 1064 
justice if we could … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that is understandable.  Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well I assume that Mr Molefe says he 
wants to call it a day now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think… 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 262 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Or does he want to take a break? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think so or – I think you said you are 
already exhausted? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you would like that we adjourn? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes Chairperson especially that last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  I have to stay up and read the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I think that is fair enough.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja I really do not think that is 
10 
unreasonable at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja  ja, ja.  Let us talk about what should be 
the way forward. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chair just to perhaps outline what I 
have still got to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We must deal with the 1064 which I 
think will probably take as much time as dealing with the 100 
an hour or two.  Then what we need to deal with are some 
procedural issues in relation to that.  Then we have got to 
20 
deal with some of the Neotel and T-System contracts and 
then a number of miscellaneous issues and of course we 
have not got yet to Witness 1 and 3.  So there is quite a bit 
that still needs to be traversed I am afraid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And would your estimate of time be 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 263 of 265 
 
something like what three hours or more? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I would certainly try my best to finish 
Mr Molefe in the morning session. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If we were to start at ten or half past 
nine by one o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I do not think it can be done 
realistically faster than that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. No, no, that is fine I just wanted to 
10 
have an idea.  Now subject to both Mr Molefe’s availability 
and his legal team’s availability and whatever arrangements 
may have – may exist would you propose that we continue 
with him tomorrow morning or would you propose to go to the 
next witness give him a break and then he comes back or? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I would prefer and I am in your 
hands Chairperson to finish Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With his evidence yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But as you know with Mr Gama there is 
some flexibility because we.. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Have agreed to reduce the issues that 
would be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It may be that we can even confine 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 264 of 265 
 
them 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To a greater extent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So that we do not disturb the schedule 
too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  So you would propose that we 
continue tomorrow morning with Mr Molefe? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes with your leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that would be fine from my side.  
Would that be fine with you Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I also prefer to finish with Mr Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Your legal team is fine as well I 
guess? 
ADV MASUKU:  We are – we okay tomorrow Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What it would also enable us to do is I 
mean the documents the four documents that Mr Molefe has 
20 
introduced it is obviously important. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That we get the Secretariat to add 
those formally to the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
09 MARCH 2021 – DAY 357 
 
Page 265 of 265 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And they will be paginated and added 
to all our files and he can then address them.  I do not want 
it to be seen that we are not giving him opportunity to 
discuss those documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  So let us then adjourn and 
start at ten o’clock tomorrow.  Ja okay alright we will adjourn 
now and then we will resume tomorrow at ten o’clock in the 
morning. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 10 MARCH 2021 
