 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 306 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 118 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 3 of 118 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 13 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Kennedy, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are we ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We are ready thank you Chair.  But 
before we call or ask leave to call the next witness Chair 
may 
I 
raise 
a 
point 
that 
follows 
from 
yesterday’s 
proceedings?  You will recall our first witness yesterday 
was Mr Sadik a current acting GCEO of the Denel group 
10 
and he undertook to provide by way of an affidavit the 
settlement agreement that was concluded between Denel 
and Ms Africa the former Company Secretary of Denel. 
 
That undertaking has now been fulfilled and he has 
provided an affidavit.  May I take you in Bundle 12 – Denel 
Bundle 12 the support staff have taken the liberty of 
inserting into Bundle 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  What page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The affidavit.  It is at page 665. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is a very brief affidavit from Mr 
Sadik. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The one he promised yesterday.  And 
attached to that is a document headed Notification of 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 4 of 118 
 
Termination of Service.  And following that from page 669 
is the actual termination of employment agreement.  This is 
the settlement agreement that he referred to.   
 
And if I may draw your attention Chair in particular 
to page 676 paragraph 7.1 sets out the package equivalent 
to twelve months salary, an ex gratia amount of R1.6 odd 
million  so it is R1. – yes R1.642 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In her case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May we then ask leave to have that 
admitted formerly as an Exhibit in the commission?  Mr 
Sadik’s affidavit was previously admitted as Exhibit W26 
we would ask the – leave for this affidavit with its 
annexures from page 665 to be admitted as Exhibit W26.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Talib Sadik starting at 
page 665 is admitted as Exhibit W26.1 together with its 
annexures. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  May we then ask 
your leave to call our next witness?  It is Mr Mantsha. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Please administer the oath.  
Good morning Mr Mantsha.  Good morning.  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MANTSHA:  My names are Lungisani Daniel Mantsha. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 5 of 118 
 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and 
say, I truly affirm. 
MR MANTSHA:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you; you may be seated. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  May I direct your 
attention to the fact that Mr Mantsha is today assisted by a 
10 
legal team of our learned friend Mr Jaap Cilliers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  From the Pretoria Bar instructed by 
attorneys Denga. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Cilliers would you like to place 
yourself on record just from where you are? 
ADV CILLIERS SC:   As you please Chair.  I am indeed the 
JG Cilliers I am a senior counsel from Pretoria.  I am 
instructed by my learned attorney who is sitting on my left 
hand side Mr Denga on behalf of the witness. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you very much Mr Cilliers.  
Yes Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  My learned friend 
has requested an opportunity for the witness to address 
you briefly in some introductory remarks. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 6 of 118 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Where is subject to your guidance 
and ruling. We have no objection to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  It is our process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine.  Mr Mantsha you may 
address me.  Yes you may do so. 
MR MANTSHA:  Thank you Chair.  I appear before you 
Chair as the former Chairperson of Denel board.  So I am 
going to speak as far as the acts, decisions of the board 
10 
that I led as a Chair and I serve as a non-executive 
director as taken as far as it relates to issues which have 
been investigated by this commission. 
 
To the best of my abilities I will try to recall.  As we 
know this is five years ago.  I might not have certain 
details. When you hear me talking about we I would be 
referring to the colleagues that I served with at the board. 
 
And I will also deal with any matter that might relate 
to me in my personal capacity.  So I think it is important to 
place a number of issues into perspective to give the 
20 
Chairperson the context and to give the commission legal 
team the context. 
 
I think we all know the – some of the decisions 
taken.  They were in the media and there were a lot of 
speculation about what could have been the motives. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 7 of 118 
 
 
I think just to start let me explain the formation of 
what is known as Denel Asia.  And I do so Chairperson on 
the basis of the information within my knowledge and the 
information which I – it has been relayed to me. 
 
For a start Denel went to India on its own twenty 
years 
or 
more 
before 
my 
appointment 
as 
a 
board 
chairperson and my board in 2015. But what then happened 
Denel got blacklisted in India and reasons being they were 
accused 
of 
engaging 
in 
illegal 
activities 
inter 
alia 
corruption and bribery. 
10 
 
So 
ever 
since 
then 
there 
has 
been 
litigation 
between the authorities in India and Denel as a result of 
those allegations.   
 
My understanding is of course the authorities in 
India and here they had discussions to try to resolve the 
matter.  The matter was also in the Supreme Court in India 
and that litigation dragged for a long time. 
 
So as far as twenty or twenty five years before my 
arrival Denel had targeted the Indian market  They went 
there but from what I understand they went with the wrong 
20 
way. 
 
During 
the 
February 
20 
– 
I 
thin 
2015 
as 
I 
understand the litigation and the dispute between the 
authorities here and India I think came to close – I might 
not be able to relate the date or the year whether it was 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 8 of 118 
 
2014 or 2015.   
 
So when that matter was resolved I think February 
2015 Denel sent a delegation to India to just try to feel the 
situation since at that stage in February 2014 the matters 
were resolved.  And Chair as I have taken the position from 
July I am not sure about the date but July 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  June/July 2015. 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja.  So the process at that stage in 
February to engage that market we were not there.  Then 
during the induction as a new board the inductions are 
10 
normally presented by the Executive Management of the 
company and the leadership of the department.   
 
Of course the department will take you through the 
protocols, 
the 
regulatory 
environment 
as 
far 
as 
the 
company relates to them and of course the management 
will take you through the strategic issue, the direction 
where the company is going to go and all sorts of things. 
 
At that point I do not remember exactly who has 
handed to me a document called Not Verbal.  Not Verbal is 
a diplomatic language. A communication between one state 
20 
to another and that document simply say well the dispute 
between 
Denel 
and 
the 
Indian Authorities 
has 
been 
resolved. 
 
That is fine but of course during the induction as 
the executives are trying to project you know the current 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 9 of 118 
 
business, the future and everything.  So Indian market has 
been always a very important market for Denel because 
even the studies at that time as presented they were 
showing the fastest growing market. 
 
So that was fine.  My – the meeting of my board – 
the first meeting was on the 10 September 2015.  In that 
meeting of course we have been taken through discussion 
of the previous board and you know the strategic issues of 
which again the expansion of Denel into that market 
because maybe just to give a little background. 
10 
 
The foreign market of the Denel it is mainly – it was 
at my time it was mainly in the Middle East.  And that 
market had its own complicity.  And of course the domestic 
market which is the South African Defence Force I think it  
is – it is an open secret that every budget vote I think we 
can go as early as ever since the dawn of democracy the 
defence budget vote is decreasing all the time because of 
course the Sovereign has got pressing issues.  To a point 
where the domestic defence market cannot sustain the 
company.  So that is a strong argument made.   
20 
 
And Chair I happened to have the – the minutes but 
of course I do not want to hand them to you unless if you 
permit me to do so.  Which has captured the presentation 
on the 10 September of my new board.  
 
And in that presentation there is an overview. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 10 of 118 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe – maybe before I forget do 
feel free to hand them to the legal team so that they can 
assess them and at the right time they can make them 
available to me. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson with your direction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am fine to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. 
MR MANTSHA:  I am fine to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  I will do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:  So – so at that stage… 
ADV CILLIERS SC:  Mr Chair maybe if I can just interrupt 
it is not a situation where Mr Mantsha has any reservations 
of 
handing 
it 
in 
he 
is 
just 
worried 
about 
maybe 
confidentiality situations between him and Denel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV CILLIERS SC:  So he has got it available and he is 
willing to hand it to you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV CILLIERS SC:  It is only that he – I did not enough 
time to prepare on these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV CILLIERS SC:  It is a question of his – worried that 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 11 of 118 
 
he does not want to breach the confidentiality situation 
with Denel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no that is fine.  I understood him 
also to be feeling free to hand them in but I just thought it 
is better that the legal team sees them first before they get 
to me.  Ja. 
ADV CILLIERS SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Okay.   
MR MANTSHA:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Then a presentation is made of the 
markets that the company should go to and a resolution on 
the 10 September were thought by the executive that said 
the executive must be mandated to explore the Indian 
market.  Basically to go and see if we cannot set a 
company now the formation of the company. 
 
So a resolution was presented – I mean was 
approved the board as requested by the management.  And 
ever since then work was being done by the management 
and the management briefing the board on what was 
20 
happening as far as that process is concerned. 
 
So I must say to you Chair that that process was 
undertaken in terms of the PFMA.  That process was 
undertaken in consultation with the department and in 
consultation with the National Treasury. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 12 of 118 
 
 
There have been a number of meetings where the 
executives met National Treasury and met the Department 
of Public Enterprise to discuss the timeframe of when to 
submit and what information is required. 
 
And this a matter of standard.  When a state owned 
company intends to form a Joint Venture or go into another 
market you have to get the permission from the executive 
authority.   
 
But before you get that permission you must give a 
pre-notification to the executive authority to say look I am 
10 
going to form this or I am going to this market for these 
reasons. 
 
The 
executive 
authority 
will 
ask 
you 
the 
questions; would make whatever inputs are concerned and 
that position was done.  To a point where the formal 
applications were made I think they were submitted around 
15 December – around somewhere – somewhere 15 
December or 13 December I do not recall but before they  
were submitted again there was a meeting where the whole 
process was explained and the urgency of the matter was 
explained. 
20 
 
In terms of the context I am trying to give Chair is 
that the journey of Denel to Asia or to India started almost 
thirty or more years back.  And when Denel was freed from 
those corruption and whatever thing it eagerly wanted to 
enter the market.  And the urgency Chair was triggered by 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 13 of 118 
 
a number of reasons. 
 
One reason was at the time when we took over in 
July Denel debt level at that stage was very high.  If I 
remember well the Denel had over R8 billion facilities with 
the banks.  This relates to – because when you tender for 
an arms procurement whatever the thing there is always 
guarantee payments, bond and what have you.   
 
So Denel was R8 billion and was left with like R2 
billion in terms of the facilities it had.  Denel at that stage 
owed Nedbank and ABSA over R4.8 billion and at the point 
10 
I think the creditors from just suppliers small and medium 
companies I think it was over R200 million debts which 
were over 200 days unpaid. 
 
So there was a very serious cash problem and also 
compounded by the transaction which Denel just acquired 
LSSA for over three quarter of a billion and Denel had no 
funds to service that kind of transaction. 
 
So the company was in a dire, dire need to actually 
find new market and try to generate some revenue.  So 
when I look at it Chair by the time my board came in Denel 
20 
was already a sinking ship. 
 
The debts level were too high.  That is why in terms 
of the transaction which I will talk a little bit because it has 
triggered the suspension of CFO and the CE then.  The 
advice at that point was Denel could not be able to service 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 14 of 118 
 
any debt and if Denel wanted to take any debts like LSSA it 
must request the Sovereign to try to put the money 
 
So we are in that situation and my board was 
committed to save the sinking ship.  And the only way to 
save the sinking ship was to try to make decisions to try to 
get the new markets where you earn revenue. 
 
So there was no rush to the decision of Denel Asia 
as I have already explained when it started.  So the 
situation was not getting better but the applications were 
sent.  The department was sensitised on the urgency of the 
10 
matter and I think Chairperson one appreciation should be 
Denel unlike Eskom does not get any guarantee from the 
state. 
 
If the South African Defence Force wants equipment 
they can go to anyone else including Denel.  So we do not 
have reserved – Denel does not have a reserved market be 
it domestic, be international. 
 
So everything that it does it has to compete and as 
you know Chair business it is about opportunities and the 
opportunities are not there all the time.  And the business 
20 
that we talking about is a very hard business.  One is not 
selling cell phones.  One is selling weapons of mass 
destruction and the consumption is the state – is to state 
to state. 
 
So it is a very difficult business to get involved.  It 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 15 of 118 
 
has got lot of red tapes.  It has got lot of regulation that is 
why other people call arm dealers whatever the case might 
be.  It is not a simple business.  So when you enter that 
business you have got no time to slip because when you 
look at it you compete with big defence companies coming 
from big countries like United State, Russia, China and 
others who have got more financial muzzle to – to take you 
off the way and political muzzle to just get deals away. 
 
So it is a business that requires serious agility and 
you have to take decisions and try to execute because it is 
10 
a very difficult market. So all of these is sensitised to the 
department but then the applications were made in terms of 
the law. The applications of course after thirty days the law 
says if you do not get an answer from the executive 
authority in thirty days you must assume that it is granted. 
 
The law is there for a reason and of course as law 
abiding board we acted according to the provision of that 
Act and we even went further to try to get a declaratory 
order that we complied. 
 
But Chair I must say to you that when you apply 
20 
these commissions from Executive Authority which is 
Public Enterprises and National Treasury because Denel 
had to get approval from National Treasury on the basis 
that National Treasury has given a guarantee. At that stage 
I think it was R1.8 billion. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 16 of 118 
 
 
So whatever transaction you have to do National 
Treasury must see it and look at it. So from that point the 
company was launched.  All the regulatory matters were 
followed and something that we did not know there was a 
political situation in the country and in terms of that 
political situation in the country certain events happened in 
December 2015.  And those events were leaked to the 
establishment of Denel Asia. 
 
All sorts of connection were made.  Relationship 
between other people to other people and this is how it 
10 
happened.  But I am here Chair to explain the basis upon 
which the board took those decisions and the information 
which was before the board. 
 
This information was not only before the board but 
was before National Treasury and the Department of Public 
Enterprises.  This included a proper business case, the 
due diligence report which have been done to all the 
parties. 
 
But by that stage the partner that Denel had picked 
to go to the Asian market with instead of looking at the 
20 
business case of the formation the politics overwhelmed 
the business because of the leans of the partner and all 
the explanations which were portrayed in the media. 
 
But that as it may it created problems for the 
company.  We wanted to do business not to deal with all 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 17 of 118 
 
sorts of things, political issues and other things which were 
playing out in the media.   
 
We then decided as the responsible board to say 
look our intention to go to the Asian market was firstly and 
inter alia with all the other things.  Our engineers are 
sitting idle.  There is no work.  We have got no cash.  The 
young generation of engineers are not getting expertise 
because we have got no work.  And the employment 
situation we will be forced to retrench many people 
because there is no business. 
10 
 
So we considered many factors.  I think all of it is 
said in the applications.  We considered many factors but 
our conclusion was it is in the best interest of the Republic 
that the – the following entity would and a foreign currency 
to the Republic.  Anywhere the Republic was 51%.  
Anywhere the Republic was not putting a cent into that 
investment.  The Republic was making available the 
expertise of its engineers and the technology. 
 
The partner was putting R100 million to have that 
business work.  And Chair you would know that in any 
20 
business you can never give guarantee that the business is 
going to be successful. 
 
You know the true heart of an entrepreneur is to 
take a chance and calculate the chance and I certainly tell 
you that the chance that was taken, the company had 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 18 of 118 
 
worked on it for many years and even before my arrival and 
the arrival of my board the company has gone through that 
process.  The company was satisfied that the proper case 
was made that is reasonable prospect that we going to be 
successful in that business. 
 
And as responsible board we took that decision.  
But you might not aware Chair in terms of the governance 
procedures of how the things come into play.  I think it is 
important because you – you sit with all these allegations 
and I must as I sit here share my experience with you on 
10 
certain things that the protocols that follows. 
 
The executive of the company generate a business 
case.  They bring the business case.  Before they bring it 
to the board the business case goes to several committees 
of the board.  The Social and Ethic Committee will deal 
with the social aspect of that business case.  The Audit 
and Risk will deal with the business case and all sorts of 
things.  The HR and or – so it goes to those committees 
and those committees look at it.  It comes to the board and 
then 
the 
board 
will 
hear 
the 
reports 
from 
various 
20 
committees and deliberate on them and deliberate on 
recommendations of various committees. 
 
And either say management we agree with this or we 
do not agree with this or go and make a follow up on this.  
And when you look at this the transaction that I am briefing 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 19 of 118 
 
about there was extensive work done to try to cover certain 
areas.  But be that as it may Chair I just want to clarify and 
correct the incorrect information which has been played for 
some time that the appointment of myself as the chair and 
the board was to initiate the Indian/Denel project and it is 
not true.  The project was there before we started.  Yes the 
project as I said was to the best interest of this country.  
Was going to create employment; was going to – as you 
know that Defence companies do lot of diplomacy, and 
defence companies do a lot of due political work.  So in 
10 
totality from the due political point of view, it was great for 
the country.  From the diplomatic point of view, it was great 
for the country.   
 
But as state-owned companies, something that I am sure 
Chair you have observed many times from the witnesses that 
you have listened to.  Sometimes politics overcome a 
business case.  And with respect to the Chair.   
 
My conclusion and my experience with this as the chair 
of the board in my board.  The politics and the events which 
were happening at the time, which we had no control of.   
20 
 
It is only when I listened to people talking in this 
Commission.  Say:  Oh, could that have been the reason why 
there was no answer here is because of this information.  
But all our interest was to push a business.  That is all we 
are trying to do.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 20 of 118 
 
 
So it is again not correct that the suspension of the 
executives had anything to do with the move to go to India.  
The suspension of the executives had everything to do with a 
transaction which they presided over during our appointment 
as the board.  And this is the transaction where Denel went 
to buy a company for R 855 million.   
 
When we started our work on the 10 t h of September, we 
were then told that Denel must pay R 455 million to Nedbank 
on the 30t h of September.  That was a hell shock to us.   
 
So, of course, we probed how did this happen.  There 
10 
was a transaction which was started before us.  The 
acquisition of the LSSA and the manner that the transaction 
was structured and the information, which was presented to 
the board, gave rise to the suspension of the CFO and the 
CE.   
 
Unfortunately, that transaction, of course, was not 
presided by our board.  But our board, in terms of the 
conditions from National Treasury - when National Treasury 
approved that board, they put a very stringent condition.   
 
And one of it was, the board should make an irrevocable 
20 
undertaking that Denel will not go to the state and look for 
funding 
to 
finance 
anything 
might 
come 
out 
of 
this 
transaction.  And Denel should be able to repay.  I think it 
was R 650 million of the guarantee at the specific time.   
 
So, of course, my board is confronted with those issues.  
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 21 of 118 
 
There was no stage we could make that irrevocable 
undertaking.  There was no money to service that debt.  We 
did not have the R 455 million to pay to Nedbank on the 
30 t h of September.   
 
And the basis of agreeing to an arrangement that you 
will get a bridging finance for six-months - while the approval 
by the executive authority and National Treasury, they were 
based on the fact that the loan terms were five years.   
 
And when all of that was changed to six-months without 
the executive authority getting involved.  And the real 
10 
implication of that Chair of not paying the R 455 million on 
the 30t h of September to Nedbank, would have meant a 
default.   
 
And in terms of the protocol that operates because 
state-owned companies, they go to the board, raise cash and 
some of it is guaranteed by the state.  So Denel had, at that 
stage, I think bonds around three billion plus.   
 
And the default would have triggered the bondholders to 
recall their facilities, which would mean, apart from the 
R 455 million that we have to pay, we would then have to pay 
20 
three point something billion.   
 
And the effect was beyond Denel because then it would 
mean the bondholders of other state-owned companies, it 
would trigger a cause-default against all the state-owned 
companies.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 22 of 118 
 
 
So new as we were, it was – we were overwhelmed  We 
were complete overwhelmed to say:  Well, we are the people 
who are going to preside over this catastrophe.  We did not 
want to do that.  So we acted.  We took a decision.   
 
We suspended them because we were convinced that 
was reckless lending and the protocols which they were told 
to be followed were not followed.   
 
But we move there and I think towards the end, I think 
on the meeting of the 10t h, then the resolution was made by 
the board to say the Audit and Risk Committee should work 
10 
with the then management to try to avert the situation and 
investigate exactly what happened.   
 
So I then undertook a trip with the former CE, who I 
must say, we had a very good cordial working relationship.  
We undertook a trip.  We had discussion about the situation. 
I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You say, the former...? 
MR MANTSHA:   The former CE. 
CHAIRPERSON:   CE? 
MR MANTSHA:   Mr Salugee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   So we had a very good working relationship 
and part of the discussions we had, of course, was the 
situation back at home.  At that point, of course, we realised 
how grave the situation was and he then said to me:  But 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 23 of 118 
 
Chair, do not get us fired here.  So I said:  Well, let us go 
back home and we will hear what the Audit and Risk 
Committee has find.   
 
So the point I am making again is.  There was no 
intention to suspend anybody.  The evidence which we were 
confronted with was such that the two executives recklessly 
and they have breached even the conditions of grant.  
Therefore, an action had to be taken.   
 
I, as the person Chair, having experience of working with 
lots of people who have lost jobs or representing them.  So I 
10 
am bias in trying to fire someone and I will do that only if 
there was nothing else to do.   
 
There were a lot of efforts to try to get cooperation, to 
try to get more information.  I think even the meeting that 
they had with the Audit and Risk Committee lasted for a very 
long time and the board meeting convened very late and 
certain decisions were taken.   
 
But suffice to say to you that those decisions were taken 
in the best interest of the company.  It had nothing personal 
against the executives, as I have said to you.  I think even 
20 
the former CE would say we had a very good cordial 
relationship.  I actually liked him.  I thought he liked me too.  
So we were working well together.  We had no issues.   
 
But the facts were such, a decision had to be taken and 
they had to be suspended.  Then, of course, we then moved 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 24 of 118 
 
to the issue of a settlement.   
 
When we were faced with that situation, overwhelmed as 
we were, the intention of the board was firstly.  We should 
not allow there should be a cross-default, across all the 
state-owned companies.  We should not allow the collapse of 
Denel.   
 
Yes, we do not have the R 455 million but at that stage, 
Nedbank was very angry.  Nedbank was angry because when 
the money was borrowed from the, Nedbank was informed – 
this is my understanding – was informed that, give us 
10 
R 455 million.  The four hundred will pay for my own 
pockets.  Nedbank then realised that the four hundred which 
they paid to make eight fifty-five, came from ABSA and ABSA 
was given a security of four hundred million which was the 
money that was ring fenced by the company in terms of the 
Hoefyster Project.  Whatever.  So they were very angry.   
 
And again, the specific condition of approval by the 
Minister of Public Enterprises was:  Please, do not play the 
banks against one another.  And here we are.  Nedbank is 
angry that:  Look, all you did to us was to put security of 
20 
shares but without ABSA you have put security, real security, 
you put the money.  So there was a tense relationship 
arising of that and this is when we understood that Nedbank, 
in fact, conducted a due diligence.   
 
I do not have the facts to the report to anything.  This is 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 25 of 118 
 
the understanding as it was related to me that they advised 
Denel that:  Look, we do not have money to do this 
transaction and you are highly indebted.  So if you say this 
deal has everything to do with the National Defence Force, 
then ask them to put the money.   
 
So the relationship with Nedbank, at that point, was not 
good because they felt they were misled.  They were not 
treated equally like ABSA.  So the focus of the board and the 
acting Executive was to try to get a deal with Nedbank to 
extent the terms that we do not pay the money at that time.   
10 
 
Eventually, an agreement was reached that there was a 
little bit of space and I think they said:  Okay, pay us half.  I 
think it was another six-months but I am not sure.   
 
And then, of course, we had no option.  We either pay 
the half or we want all the money.  I think then the deal was 
reached.  The CFO, the then CFO, the then acting CFO and 
members of the Audit and Risk Committee, they were 
working full-blown on this.  So that agreement was reached.   
 
Then we had to scrape through and try to find some cash 
so that we do not default.  And at that point Chair, we had no 
20 
focus on the disciplinary issues of these two executives.   
 
The matter, of course, as you know is an administrative 
matter that is run by your HR and the company secretary and 
all sorts of things.  But unbeknown to us, politically events 
were building up.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 26 of 118 
 
 
There were hearings and change and this and this but 
just to set the record straight.  We were consumed to try to 
deal with what we considered a real matter.   
 
But then political events overtook a lot of things to a 
point where we come to a conclusion as a board after we 
had been advised by the management that on the basis that 
they might not led let we deal with this.  It is very sensitive.   
 
When you go out there and discuss these transactions, 
they want to know that you will stay tomorrow.  You are the 
man that they will be dealing with you tomorrow.  And then, 
10 
of course, when you deal with the local situation like your 
creditors, the banks, of course they want certainty to say:  
Look, if we make an agreement with you today, nobody is 
going to come tomorrow and try to change it because you 
will not be there.   
 
So the overall interest of business, they informed us as 
proposed by the management to say:  Look, we cannot afford 
to have this matter being protracted because one we do not 
have stability internally.   
 
And two, it is raising concerns in the market because the 
20 
people  who we are borrowing money from, they want to deal 
with something stable.  So we considered the issues and at 
that stage, of course, there was full-blown litigation by the 
suspended employees.   
 
And Chair, sometime in leadership you have to balance 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 27 of 118 
 
the interest.  And of course, Chair would know with your vast 
experience in many of these matters.  And in terms of our 
collective wisdom, we looked at the all the factors and we 
considered the business stability and continuity.  It is more 
important than any other thing because we are trying to save 
the ship.   
 
We then considered the implication of all the legal costs 
that, I mean, we already were paying.  And we felt that it will 
be in the interest of the company to close the chapter.  That 
is how the settlement was arrived at.  And then we moved 
10 
from there.   
 
But let me get back to VR Laser, which I think clearly, 
with many evidence that Chair has had so far.  Was a 
company which had a relationship with Denel and concluded 
certain agreements and that was before the appointment of 
my board.   
 
So I am not able to tell you what was considered that 
influenced the management at that stage.  There was a 
board, there were an executive at that stage.   
 
I cannot talk to you about that but all I can say is, the 
20 
management who were in charge of this stage of the 
agreement, considered whatever they have considered and 
they have entered into those agreements.   
 
And linking the VR as a partner, which has been doing 
the work with Denel before our coming, and the VR Asia 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 28 of 118 
 
which is owned by a majority shareholder of VR South Africa.  
So, of course, a case was made to us.   
 
A business case was made to us as I have alluded to it.  
That here was substantial investment, cash-wise, that the VR 
Asia was going to put and there was a proper shareholding 
agreement where the state had 51.   
 
There was a due diligence report, of course, which 
raised a number of things and as a board we said let us try 
and protect what e to protect.   
 
So there is no link between suspension and Denel Asia.  
10 
As I have already alluded to you.  I think if I can just take a 
simple logic.   
 
The evidence is that the former CE before the acting CE 
that was appointed had introduced this company to Denel for 
reasons by himself but I take a view Chair that I presume 
that we all mean well.   
 
And I would not sit here and speculate that other people 
do not mean well.  I work on the basis that he meant well for 
whatever reasons.  So he would have in terms of my 
analyses 
of 
the 
business 
case, 
any 
competent 
Chief 
20 
Executive Officer would have been convinced about the case 
which was made to go to Indian.   
 
And anyway, the minutes that I am going to hand to your 
legal team, relates to the resolution that he himself proposed 
that we must give him that permission.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 29 of 118 
 
 
So again, it is factually not correct that his suspension 
had anything to do with Denel Asia.  So I understand – I 
think I was here Chairperson when this Commission was – I 
think the first sitting of the Commission.   
 
I have listened to the leading evidence leader, Mr 
Pretorius SC when he was putting the pillars of the alleged 
State Capture, which is put(?) new boards.  My board turned 
into being after the previous board has run its life.  So it was 
a natural progression because boards are given specific 
time.  So there was no removal of a board to get my board 
10 
in.   
 
And secondly, removing the Chief Executive and the 
CFO to match(?) a way for capture.  And I say Chair, 
generally, there was no reason for us to even be alleged that 
that was the case.   
 
The removal of these executives had everything to do 
with the transaction which originated before my board was 
appointed.  Any prudent board would have taken the decision 
that we had taken.  
 
So there is no link of their departure with whatever the 
20 
allegations on the State Capture mechanism is. Is not.  So , 
of course, it is very convenient Chair, I think.  You know 
better than us.  You have been listening to this evidence.   
 
It is very convenient for people for reasons know to 
themselves to cry victim.  But a political situation was 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 30 of 118 
 
created where it was easy to say certain things and people 
could easily believe you.  But these are the facts and I am 
happy Chair that also other independent people alluded to 
some of the things that I am saying.   
 
So there is no link with that.  So then there are issues 
relating to my personal travelling.  And Chair I did travel to 
India at my own personal instance and at my own personal 
cost.  I did travel to Dubai.  I do not remember how many 
times in my own personal capacity.  I did travel to many 
other places in my capacity as the chairperson of the board.   
10 
 
And relating to information which allegedly was sent by 
either myself or my office, I can say that I have never sent 
information to people who were not supposed to see the 
information.  I have never sent information to anybody who 
had no interest in the information.   
 
So the information that they are referring to which 
relates 
to 
pre-notification, 
the 
PFMA 
application, 
that 
information would have been sent to Salim Essa who had 
been at many times operating from the Gupta premises.   
 
So as far as my relationship is concerned with the Gupta 
20 
family.  I have known the Gupta family in my capacity as a 
ministerial advisor.   
 
And at that stage, I was advising the Minister in 
Communication.  And of course, the Gupta’s were running 
the TMA.  They were stakeholder in the industry.  Where, of 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 31 of 118 
 
course, a lot of discussions between, you know, the 
government and the stakeholders time and time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which minister was that? 
MR MANTSHA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which minister was that one?  The 
Minister of Communication that you are advising?  Who was 
it? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chair, this was – this was in 2014.  This 
was around 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it not have been Ms Faith 
10 
Muthambi? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, indeed. 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay alright. 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   So I have known them in that capacity and, 
you know, we interacted in that capacity.  So you know, that 
is the relationship I had.  And beyond that, of course, I had 
20 
relationships with a number of the stakeholders that I related 
to them, arising from that.   
 
So in conclusion of what I have just said.  Just to put the 
record clear.  The board members that I have served with, 
they have served Denel and they have given everything and 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 32 of 118 
 
they have served with integrity.   
 
There is nothing that they have done which amount to 
any element of State Capture as it is, you know, put.  They 
have suspended, yes.  But they have suspended on the basis 
of the facts before them.   
 
They have settled, yes, on the basis of the facts before 
them.  They have decided, of course, to proceed with 
decisions to enter the new markets on the basis of the 
information which was presented to them.  
 
Nobody told them what decision to make.  I think, of 
10 
course, the Commission has got access to, you know, to the 
records. 
 
Because you see, a board of directors mainly acts 
through the meeting, through the resolution, through the 
deliberation 
and 
it 
is 
very 
clear 
there, 
that 
certain 
considerations were made which are black and white and 
which can be asserted(?).  And those were the basis of those 
decisions, nothing more.   
 
And Chair, just to add.  I have travelled to our biggest 
markets in the Middle East and I was shocked to see that the 
20 
majority of people who operate in those defence companies 
are South Africans.  And the majority of them worked for 
Denel.   
 
Very 
competent 
engineers, 
who 
go 
there 
with 
an 
investing mind.  So, of course, the intellectual property in 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 33 of 118 
 
the space, it is in the head of an engineer.  And the product 
that they were making that side were actually better than the 
product that we are making.   
 
And those states have got big pockets.  They had new 
factories.  They had new infrastructure.  So as a chair I 
could see that we had to do something because this is what 
we call our biggest market.   
 
It is nothing more than people copying form us and 
tomorrow they would not need us.  So we tried what we could 
do.  To then say, we must then get into new technologies for 
10 
the company and there had been a lot of research and we 
got into cyber space and all sorts of things.  So we tried to 
make sure that the ship should not sink.   
 
But of course, given the fact that, you know, the 
sovereign is pressed(?) with lot of challenges in terms of 
service delivery issues.   
 
So spending money on the defence company becomes 
not the most priority.  And to have the sovereign, to still 
retain some defence capabilities, it means that the company 
must be agile enough and try to take the opportunities.   
20 
 
But maybe some of the issues that, of course, you are 
confronted with Chair – and I must say, in terms of my own 
experience, 
the 
regulatory 
framework 
in 
which 
Denel 
operates in, it is not good for the company because the 
company competes at a global space.  Locally, it has got no 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 34 of 118 
 
- there is no preference that they must be given a contract 
by South African Defence Force.   
 
And if you have a regulatory involvement, I think a lot of 
entrepreneurs will tell you that one of the big enemies of 
business is ridged regulatory environment because business 
in its nature is opportunities and they arise anytime and 
agility is very required.   
 
So that has been also a frustration.  And if you see 
where we sell(?), they say:  Ja, but why did you push so 
hard to do this?  We pushed so hard because we are doing 
10 
business.  We are doing business because of opportunities 
come and go.  And we are doing business in a very hard 
environment.   
 
And the other issues, except regulatory framework.  
state-owned companies are led by politicians.  And when I 
say politicians, I mean executive authorities are politicians 
who sometimes, with all respect to our politicians with the 
good work they do every day. 
 
But sometimes political decisions or political interest 
overrides commercial interest of a state-owned company.  I 
20 
have personally – we have experienced that.  With respect to 
everybody 
else, 
the 
fantastic 
job 
that 
the 
executive 
authorities to do provide leadership and oversight to these 
companies.  But there is a problem that decisions are taken 
politically instead of a commercial decision to be taken.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 35 of 118 
 
 
So I think Chair, I can sit here and say a lot but I think I 
have given the context in which my board operated, the 
decisions which were linked with the State Capture, why 
were they taken and the basis upon which they were taken.  
Thank you.  Thank you for the opportunity.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you very much 
Mr Mantsha.  I just want to say maybe two things arising out 
of your evidence because what you have been doing is 
giving evidence about your experiences and those of your 
board during your time and your understanding and your 
10 
perspectives 
of 
what 
happened 
in 
regard 
to 
certain 
matters.   
 
The one is the one you just mentioned namely to 
what extent politicians – maybe political issues might 
sometimes interfere with commercial decisions or with 
business at state owned enterprises and – so that is 
something that one may need to look at, what form it takes 
and what impact does it have on a business, when does it 
happen and so on.   
A former Chairperson of one of the SOEs gave 
20 
evidence here some weeks back and said to me oh, I know 
these politicians, oh no, these ministers, you know, they 
like, you know, coming into the SOEs because they look for 
business opportunities and he said I know them, I have, 
you know, been around, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So one 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 36 of 118 
 
does not know, what one wishes is that SOEs be run in a 
manner that would make them sustainable and profitable so 
that they can, you know, fulfil their roles.  But that is the 
one part. 
The other part I want to mention is, you see, it is a 
pity that sometimes people do not come to the Commission 
to give the Commission information about matters that are 
relevant to the Commission because if we get told one side 
of the story and we never get told the other side or another 
side then we will decide on the basis of one side.  We will 
10 
make findings on the basis of one side of the story but we 
want to hear all sides of the story.  Everybody knows how 
from 2018 I have for a long time been making public 
announcements 
to 
invite 
everybody 
who 
has 
got 
information that is relevant to the Commission to please 
come forward, give us information.  Some people did come 
forward, others did not come, others came late, so there 
are those things.  So I have no doubt that when the 
Commission finishes its work there would still be many 
people who do have information that should have been 
20 
given to the Commission but who did not come forward, 
you know, which is unfortunate but, you know, we can only 
do so much. 
Now I am raising that because it is also relevant to 
your evidence in Denel because Mr Salugee gave evidence 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 37 of 118 
 
last year, you know, and you will remember that the 
Commission wanted to get statements from you and 
information to hear the board’s side of the story.  You 
know, we said please, here are statements from Mr 
Salugee, see what he says about you and the board, give 
us your affidavit because we want to hear the whole story.  
I do not want to go into it but we struggled.  We struggled. 
Now, of course, you are here now, we are happy 
that you are here but the only thing that is unfortunate is if 
we had got maybe some of the information or your side of 
10 
the story last year it could have given us a lot of time to 
investigate certain matters.  When we get it now we are 
close to the tail end of our work, some of the investigators 
have left, so it might not be so easy to do the kind of 
investigation that we would have liked to do into some of 
the matters that you may raise, you see?   
For example, I may be mistaken but I do not 
remember that when Mr Salugee gave his evidence he 
talked about – I may be mistaken, he talked about the 
issue of the loan that you are talking about was it with 
20 
Nedbank? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which I think you say was at the centre 
of their suspension and so on.  Now he may have spoken – 
maybe I have forgotten but it is quite an important matter 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 38 of 118 
 
to look at because it deals with the question of were the 
suspensions based on allegations of wrongdoing on their 
part, of failure to do their job properly or were the 
suspensions based on something else and the impression 
one got when evidence was given before and when 
evidence gets given, you know, recently, is towards the 
view that it was something else, you see?  But we do not 
hear your side of the story we will not hear about those 
allegations, you see?  And we will form whatever view 
based on what is before us whereas if people come forward 
10 
and say here is another side of the story, that helps us 
because we want to hear all sides of the story.  There is no 
such that you do not want to hear.  So you understand 
that? 
MR MANTSHA:   With respect, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you very much, I do understand but 
I think my experience in relation to the Commission, the 
manner in which people who manage the operations - of 
course, this has nothing to do with the Chair – it creates 
20 
an impression of other people are being accused of doing 
certain things and, you know, when you start a process by 
trying to [indistinct] 07.22 other people, they of course feel 
insulted, they feel angry and they do not feel they have to 
cooperate because they have been already judged. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 39 of 118 
 
 
So I think that is the problem that we see playing it 
out, I think it is the responsibility of many of us who had 
the opportunities to serve in different capacities to share 
the experience and Chair, with respect, I think if that was 
the approach – I am speaking for myself – if that was the 
approach, Chair, I am more than willing … 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   …to sit, to debate.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
MANTSHA:   …my experience in terms of the 
10 
regulatory environment as I experience it, the relationship 
with our politician, of which I have respect to them, where I 
think commercial interest have been sidelined because, 
you know, politicians are politicians. 
 
So with that, Chair, I think – speaking for myself, I 
think it is all the basis of an [indistinct] 08.42. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   It was not anything but this has nothing to 
do with the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   And I think lot of people would want to 
come and share their experience with the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And say look, this is what I experience 
and, you know… 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 40 of 118 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   This is my account or this is the journey I 
have travelled. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, that is fine.  Thank you, 
Mr Mantsha.  Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, may we 
start by just requesting your leave to introduce formally 
into the evidence the affidavits that Mr Mantsha has 
provided. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mantsha, do you have Denel 
bundle 8 in front of you? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, would you just speak into the 
microphone rather than nodding? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, this is bundle 8. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, you have that. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just remember it has to be recorded 
and transcribed possibly in the future. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So please do not just nod, try and 
bear in mind that. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I can take you please to page 330 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 41 of 118 
 
and the page numbers are printed in black at the top left 
hand corner.  It is not the pages on the right hand corner,  
in red.  Okay?  And I am simply going to give the last three 
digits of this rather long number which starts Denel 08.  
Have you got page 330? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do, I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that appears to be – what is 
referred to as a statement but in fact appears to have been 
an affidavit.  If I can take you to page 336, is that your 
signature? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, there are two signatures.  The 
top signature, is that yours? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, it is.  But may I then say something 
about this affidavit? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, let me just complete my 
questions first before you do that. 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You signed this in 
front of 
Commissioner of Oaths after taking the affirmation, is that 
20 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  What is it you want to raise 
about the affidavit? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I want to raise an issue just for 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 42 of 118 
 
correction about the breakfast meeting in Melrose.  I think 
I 
assumed 
that 
Stephan 
Burger 
was 
there 
but 
on 
recollection, he was not there.  It was myself, Mr Salugee, 
Mr Ntshepe and Mr Essa. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you referring to page 331 
paragraph 5?  Mr Mantsha, are you referring to that 
paragraph? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, yes.  Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  You have raised this 
presumably because there is – you have reflected on the 
10 
correctness of this affidavit and picked up that there may 
be an error relating to your allegation that Mr Burger 
attended a breakfast at Melrose Arch, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, somebody reminded me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MANTSHA:   When I was asking about that meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  So is it incorrect where you 
said that Mr Burger also attended that meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So you would need to delete 
20 
the words: 
“...and Mr Burger.” 
Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I ask you with your legal team’s 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 43 of 118 
 
assistance please, would you be willing to sign a further 
supplementary affidavit to correct that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright and will you provide that to 
the Commission please? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And we will then furnish that to the 
Chairperson through the formal processes of having it 
admitted.  Is there any other problem that you have picked 
up in relation to this affidavit?  Have you been through this 
10 
affidavit in preparation for this hearing together with your 
legal team? 
MR MANTSHA:   No.  No, not really. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see.  You want an opportunity to 
read through it because you want to check it now? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I think you can take me through it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Is there anything else you want 
to 
draw 
the 
attention 
because 
what 
I 
am 
trying 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think, Mr Mantsha, Mr Kennedy 
20 
seeks to establish whether you are in a position to answer 
questions based on this affidavit.  So, in other words, you 
remember what you said or whether you need to refresh 
your memory or not? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, I think the broad thrust of the affidavit 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 44 of 118 
 
I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   As I said in my opening, Chair, this is five 
years or something ago. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   There could have been other details that I 
omitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand that, I am just trying to 
go through the formal process of getting you to confirm 
10 
under oath here that the affidavit is correct.  I accept that 
there may be some details you cannot always remember 
but that Is not my question.  The affidavit was signed fairly 
recently.  If we look at page 336, it was signed on the 28 
August 2020, is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you have, to your credit, drawn 
attention to a point of detail that you felt needs to be 
corrected and that is the Melrose Arch breakfast and that 
Mr Burger was not in attendance and we thank you for that.  
20 
Otherwise, can we take it that you are – you confirm, as 
you did before Commissioner of Oaths in August 2020 that 
the affidavit is true and correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Please do not sit too far away 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 45 of 118 
 
from the microphone, Mr Mantsha. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, when you are too far it will not be 
recorded – your answers will not be recorded. 
MR MANTSHA:   I just have a little bit of problem with 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Eyesight? 
MR MANTSHA:   Eyesight, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it the light or just eyesight? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think it is just the sight is failing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is it? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it too dark there? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no, no, it is, I cannot read when it is 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I can understand, the documents 
have to be a bit of a distance from you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I perhaps suggest respectfully 
that – yes, you either move the microphone or move 
20 
yourself and if you need to put the documents above the 
desk then perhaps that will help. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or when you answer you can move 
forward a little bit and then move back.  Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, thank you.  So do you 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 46 of 118 
 
confirm that the affidavit subject to the correction about Mr 
Burger and the Melrose Arch breakfast the contents are 
true and correct?  Mr Mantsha, you are attorney, is there a 
difficulty with the question?  I am asking you can you 
confirm that the contents of this affidavit are true and 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I am actually trying to read to see if 
there is any other detail that I [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, maybe we should adjourn for ten 
minutes or so, I do not know.  Do you need time to refresh? 
MR MANTSHA:   I though, Chair, I could read it as is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As we go along. 
MR MANTSHA:   As we go along rather than to waste time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the only concern is whether that is 
not going to slow us down anyway.  I think maybe let us 
take the tea break.  Let us take tea break.  What do you 
think, Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair, it is pity that 
20 
he did not read it beforehand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But bet it as it may. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes perhaps – these affidavits are 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 47 of 118 
 
extremely brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think there are three affidavits he 
will need to read, they are all – the next one is, for 
example, a page and a half and the next one a few pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Perhaps we can take a tea 
adjournment and you can read through them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is 15 minutes, 20 minutes fine, Mr 
Mantsha, to go through them? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chair, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us make it twenty minutes, that 
takes us to twenty five past and my watch says about five 
past. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, twenty five past.  Thank you, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you were able to go through the 
affidavits Mr Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  Mr Kennedy? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 48 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.   Thank you for 
doing so Mr Mantsha.  So if we’re looking at page 330 – 
I’m  sorry just give me a second, yes page 330, have you 
been through that affidavit? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes I have been through this page. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And apart from the correction you 
have 
already 
made 
reference 
to 
on 
the 
next 
page, 
paragraph 5, to Mr Burger, having to be deleted there, 
apart from that, can you confirm now under oath that the 
contents of this affidavit are true and correct? 
10 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
I 
just 
wish 
to 
point 
on 
specific 
paragraphs. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Yes, Chair can I just so that we have 
some bit of framework for how we are going to deal with it, 
are you going to add to something?   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, I am going to ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay I prefer you not to add to 
anything at this stage. 
MR MANTSHA:   No I am not adding. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Oh I thought you said yes when I 
20 
asked you. 
MR MANTSHA:   I just want to make a correction on. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Make a correction, that’s fine, yes, 
paragraph? 
MR MANTSHA:   I have already indicated paragraph 5. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 49 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes we have dealt with that, what 
else? 
MR MANTSHA:   And then I have got paragraph 7 again. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Paragraph 7, yes? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes of course it is many years ago, the 
correct position is who called who I have no recollection, 
and then I have paragraph ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, before you move from that I 
don’t 
understand, 
you 
said 
you 
wanted 
to 
make 
a 
correction 
rather 
than 
adding 
something, 
is 
there 
a 
10 
correction here, is there something wrong here? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, maybe let’s do it this way Mr 
Kennedy and Mr Mantsha.  Maybe let us say, let us do it 
this way you asked Mr Mantsha whether the – once you 
have confirmed his signature and he deposed to the 
affidavit before a Commissioner of Oaths you ask him 
whether the contents are true, then he can say, Mr 
Mantshe you can say they are true and correct except 
certain corrections that you will make in due course, during 
20 
your evidence.  Then when Mr Kennedy deals with that 
then you can say in that paragraph here is what should be 
corrected and this is what it would say. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let’s do it that way, in that way 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 50 of 118 
 
we can get the affidavits submitted and then we start with 
questions. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, we can then make some 
progress, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you for the guidance.   Mr 
Mantsha are you happy to proceed on that basis?  
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, so subject to any changes you  
may want to indicate in the course of your oral evidence at 
10 
this stage are you happy to confirm that subject to that the 
contents are true and correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right thank you.  Chair may we then 
ask leave to have this affidavit at page 330 admitted as an 
exhibit in Bundle Denel 8 as Exhibit W22.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit/statement of Mr Lugisani 
Daniel Mantsha starting at page 330 is admitted as Exhibit 
W22.1. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.  May we then 
20 
proceed Mr Mantsha to the next affidavit in the bundle, it is  
at page 337 to 338, it is a two page affidavit.  Is that your 
signature as the first signature on page 338? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was signed in front of a 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 51 of 118 
 
Commissioner of Oaths on the 28 t h of August 2020, 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Have you been during the tea 
adjournment through this affidavit? 
MR MANTSHA:   I did look at it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are there any corrections you want to 
draw attention to now or will you deal with anything further 
in the course of your oral evidence that you would like to? 
MR MANTSHA:   I would deal with corrections. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You will deal with corrections later? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Subject to that do you confirm that 
the contents are true and correct?  
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and your third affidavit I 
believe is at page 342. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t want us to finish with this? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I beg your pardon, quite so Chair, 
thank you.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May we ask then leave to have that 
admitted as Exhibit W22.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The statements/affidavit of Mr Lugisani 
Daniel Mantsha starting at page 337 is admitted as Exhibit 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 52 of 118 
 
WW22.2. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair, and there is a third 
affidavit Mr Mantsha that you will find at page 342.  At 
page 345 it appears to be your signature at the top, is that 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   340? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Two, sorry, five, 345 there appears to 
be your signature at the top.  345 Mr Mantsha, do you have 
345 on the top left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look at the black numbers. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   I can see it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that your signature at the top Mr 
Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Again subject to the 
same qualifications that you may want to add or correct at 
a later stage subject to that you confirm the contents of 
this affidavit? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Chair may we then ask 
formally for leave to admit this affidavit from page 342 in 
Bundle 8, as Exhibit W22.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavits/statement of Mr Lugisani 
Daniel Mantsha starting at page 342 is admitted as Exhibit 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 53 of 118 
 
W22.3 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.   Now Mr Mantsha in 
the opening statement that you gave you indicated that at 
a certain stage in 2015 you were appointed as Chairperson 
of the Board of Denel, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you served for how long? 
MR MANTSHA:   I resigned around 2018 I think it was, 
towards the end of February. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your appointment, can I take you in 
10 
this bundle to page 422, this is Minister Lynne Brown’s 
public statement relating to your appointment as part of the 
new board.  Do you have that? 
MR MANTSHA:   420? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Two. 
MR MANTSHA:   I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So it was on the 24 t h of July 2015 the 
Public 
Enterprises 
Minister 
Lynne 
Brown 
made 
the 
following, made a public announcement where she says 
following cabinet approval, she has rotated the Board of 
20 
Denel, Mr Daniel Mantsha is appointed as the non-
executive, 
as 
a 
non-executive 
director 
and 
as 
the 
Chairperson of the Board with effect from 24 July 2015 for 
a three year period.  
 
So you would ordinarily in terms of the three year 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 54 of 118 
 
appointment have carried on until the 23 r d of July 2018, is 
that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you didn’t – sorry may I just ask 
you please not to sit too far back from the microphone.  
Thank you.   I know these things can be a bit tedious but I 
am afraid I just have to remind you otherwise we could 
have problems with the recording. 
MR MANTSHA:   Thank you Counsel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you very much.   So did you 
10 
resign, I think you said in February 2018?   Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   I think so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, so you didn’t serve out the full 
period of the three years, you resigned a few months 
before the end of that three year period, is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And why was that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well personal reasons. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was it personal reasons? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then Lynne Brown, the Minister 
then sets out at the foot of the page a brief summary of the 
profiles of the non-executive directors being as follows;  
“Mr Mantsha obtained a BJuris in 1991 and LLB in 
1993, both from the University of Venda.  He is an 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 55 of 118 
 
attorney who has acquired valuable experience over 
the 
years 
in 
Corporate 
Finance, 
Transactional 
Advising, Business Management, Commercial Law, 
Media and Communication Law, Administrative and 
Constitutional Law.” 
Does that accurately provide the facts as to very briefly 
your background? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well Chairperson this is not a statement 
from me, this is what they wrote. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes so I am asking you whether it is 
10 
accurate? 
MR MANTSHA:   I cannot comment on that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You can’t comment on whether she 
has been correct in saying for example you have got a B 
Juris and an LLB, surely you would know. 
MR MANTSHA:   No, of course I do have. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well is there anything wrong in what 
she has said? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well I don’t want to comment on the 
statement issued by her department, yes I have got 
20 
experience in these kind of things. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   These kind of things? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, and in addition to what she has 
set out of course you had acted as an advisor to the then 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 56 of 118 
 
Communication Minister, Ms Faith Muthambi, correct, you 
told the Chair that earlier.  
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, it refers to you having apart 
from your experience and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Kennedy, well I am not 
sure Mr Mantsha whether there was any misunderstanding 
between yourself and Mr Kennedy in terms of what he 
sought to establish.  I understand you Mr Kennedy to seek 
to establish whether Mr Mantsha was confirming that what 
10 
Minister Brown told the public about him was correct? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes I did ask that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now that may be important Mr 
Mantsha because this was a statement where you were 
being appointed to a State owned entity, the public wants 
to know the people who are being appointed and the 
Minister tells the public certain things about those people 
and the public might say well those people are experienced 
so we have comfort, or they might say but these people 
have no experience, so I think it is important for you to be 
20 
able to say if there is something that is not accurate that 
the Minister said in the statement about you, or if you say 
no there is nothing inaccurate then it is fine, but I think the 
public would be concerned if the Minister has told them 
who you are and what experience you have and then you 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 57 of 118 
 
are not able to either confirm or say no she got something 
wrong. 
MR MANTSHA:   I think it is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Correct, okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright thank you.  Of course this was 
a very brief summary of some of the main points, no points 
there are other facts relating to your experience and so 
forth, one being that you had been the advisor to the 
previous communications minister, Faith Muthambi.  Were 
you the legal advisor or a special advisor or a policy 
10 
advisor to Minister Muthambi? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well I was appointed a legal advisor but 
when you advise legally there are policy matters, there are 
political matters, so I advise across the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see, and just by way of background, 
have you ever previously managed a commercial business 
or a State owned business or served as Chairperson of the 
Board of any such business? 
MR MANTSHA:   No I have been always managing my own 
business. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your own business meaning what – 
your attorneys firm or commercial businesses? 
MR MANTSHA:   No my attorneys practice. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, okay and then she refers to 
some of your areas of expertise such as communication 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 58 of 118 
 
law, media law, administrative and constitutional law.  
Have you also had experience in labour law?  Have you 
also had experience in labour law? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson a lot, a lot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Alright while we are at 
this page I would just like to note something that Minister 
Brown has referred to earlier, in the 4 t h paragraph it says: 
“I would like to thank the outgoing Board led by 
Acting Chairperson Martie Janse [it should be I 
think van Rensburg] for an outstanding job.  They 
10 
handed over a company that is truly on a path to 
positive sustainability.  I commend them for their 
professionalism in ensuring the handover report 
was of such a quality that it will be a critical guide 
to the new board.” 
Now you did not serve on the previous board when it was 
chaired on an acting basis by Ms Janse van Rensburg, is 
that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you arrived as a new broom as it 
20 
were in Denel as the Chairperson at Denel. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There were some others that had 
crossed over from the previous board to the new board, 
Minister Brown refers to that earlier on, it is actually Mr 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 59 of 118 
 
Johannes Motseke being reappointed for purposes of 
continuity. 
 
So you arrive at somebody new in the organisation 
of Denel.  Are you able to tell the Chair please overall what 
was the state of Denel both as a business in general and in 
particularly in relation to financing when you took over as 
its Board Chairperson in 2015? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson I think I have already alluded 
to it, when the new Board, which I was part of, Denel was 
already a sinking ship. Denel was already owing creditors, 
10 
mainly small and medium enterprises over 200million and 
these invoices were more than 200 days.  Denel at that 
stage was owing Nedbank and ABSA over probably I think 
it 
was 
R4.7billion. 
 
Denel 
facilities 
with 
financial 
institutions which was mainly used for issuing guarantees 
in contracts was at that stage R8billion plus and Denel was 
left with around R2billion. 
 
So 
the 
financial 
state 
was 
dire 
at 
the 
time, 
compounded with a transaction that Denel has spent 
R855million of which Denel did not have that money.  So it 
20 
was catastrophic. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Now may I take you in 
the same bundle, bundle 8, to page 330 which is your first 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Kennedy.   It will be 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 60 of 118 
 
important 
in 
due 
course 
to 
compare 
Mr 
Mantsha’s 
description of Denel’s position when the Board that he 
chaired came in with for example what I was told by Mr 
Mhlontlo, because I did ask him what the position of Denel 
financially was when he and the other executives were 
suspended, because they were suspended within about 
three months or so after the new board had come in. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would be important in due course to 
compare and see if it sit he same. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We will do so thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mhlontlo – I beg your pardon, Mr 
Mantsha if I can direct your attention please to page 330 
that’s your first affidavit, that you signed as we saw on the 
28 t h of August 2020, was that at the request of the 
Commission?  Did you sign the affidavit at the request of 
the Commission? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC: Right and that is after as I understand 
20 
it that the Commission sent you a Rule 33 notice directing 
your attention to what Salugee had said in his affidavits, 
correct?    
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC: Right thank you, and if you look at 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 61 of 118 
 
page 330, paragraph 3 actually makes that point: 
“I have read the statements of Mr Riad Salugee and 
wish to respond to the allegations he made relating 
to me.” 
And then you do make a response and then for example at 
page 331 you refer at paragraphs 89 to 90 that is a 
reference to the paragraph 89 to 90 of Mr Salugee’s 
affidavit, correct?   
MR MANTSHA:   89 to 90?  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry I am not sure that you followed 
the question, we are at page 331, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In your affidavit, this is what you 
signed, you say 4 at paragraphs 89 to 90, do you see the 
heading?   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you say: 
“I have no knowledge of this allegation.” 
20 
I’m simply asking you when you refer ad paragraph 89 to 
90 as we as attorneys like you and counsel like me use the 
terminology ad paragraph it means referring to paragraph 
89 to 90, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 62 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it is 89 to 90 I am simply 
wanting to establish, that is 89 to 90 as numbered in Mr 
Salugee’s affidavit, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, and so it goes on for the rest 
of your affidavit.  So – and the Commission thanks you, or 
the legal team thanks you for providing this affidavit in 
response to the Rule 33 Notice, and then if I can take you 
please – and sorry, then at page 335 of the same affidavit 
you are referring to a further statement of Mr Salugee and 
10 
you give your response to that, correct?  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Then your next affidavit, we 
will get back to the contents, some of the contents of that 
at a later stage, I am just getting out of the way some – 
just the sequence of  how it was done and the formalities. 
 
337 is your next very brief affidavit, again also 
signed on the 28 t h of August 2020, and this time in 
paragraph 3 you say: 
“I have read the statement of Mr Ratatso Klakude 
20 
and wish to respond to the allegations he made 
relating to me.” 
So is that the same as the last affidavit, your attention was 
drawn by the Commission to another affidavit that came 
from Mr Klakude and you were asked to respond to that 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 63 of 118 
 
and you did so. 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, then we have at page 339 a 
letter from the Commission itself in the person of its 
Secretary, Professor Musala, you see that at page 341? 
MR MANTSHA:   I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was dated as recently as 7 t h 
October 2020 so about five or six weeks ago and that 
requested you to provide by the specified dates you will 
see in paragraph 2 an affidavit to respond to the questions 
10 
set out in paragraph 4 below, and give your full version in 
relation thereto, and then there are a number of questions 
set out at page 340, paragraph 4A to G, do you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And just by way of example paragraph 
A says: 
“You 
are 
requested 
to 
give 
your 
full 
version 
justifying the decisions that were taken by the 
Board to [a] suspend Riad Salugee who was the 
CEO, 
Fikile 
Mhlontlo 
who 
was 
the 
CFO, 
and 
20 
Elizabeth Africa who was the company secretary.” 
And then likewise in [e] for example the decision what 
motivated you to form Denel Asia and [f] to partner with VR 
Laser and [g] to litigate against Treasury. 
 
So they raise these specific questions? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 64 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that right?   And you responded to 
that in your latest affidavit at page 342, is that right?   
MR MANTSHA:  Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And we see at page 345 that that was 
signed by you in front of the Commissioner of Oaths on the 
14 t h of October 2020, which is about a week after the letter 
was dated?   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right, so it was specifically a 
10 
response to that request, correct?  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  While we are at it you were asked of 
course to provide a full version to justify the decisions.   
Now we looked at the affidavit at page 342, am I correct in 
suggesting to you that this is a very brief affidavit?  
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And it gives very little detail not 
so?   For example let’s take you to page 343, paragraph 7, 
you were asked to justify the decision relating to the 
20 
formation of Denel Asia and you simply say it is set out in 
both the PFMA Section 52, 54[2] pre-notification of Section 
51[1][g], you had nothing to add to those documents is that 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 65 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, and then you attached, helpfully 
you attached the documents that you referred to as 
Annexures A and B to your affidavit, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And we find those from page 347, is 
that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now an indulgence was granted to 
you at your and your learned counsel’s request and with 
the approval of the Chair to allow you to give an opening 
10 
statement, which you did, over some fair period this 
morning and we are grateful to you for providing detail to 
the Commission.  What I just want to raise very briefly with 
you is the concern that the learned Chair raised with you 
earlier which is – is there any particular reason why the 
considerable detail you have given to us at your own 
request in your detailed fairly lengthy opening statement 
was not provided in the form of the affidavits which you 
were specifically requested to give, not just a version but a 
full version, any reason for that? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   I think Chair I have already responded to 
the Chairperson that the approach that investigators and 
officials of the Commission they use when it comes to 
people like myself who were in the service of the country 
and that we have acquired certain information and we have 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 66 of 118 
 
– we should provide the Commission with the information.  
I think as I have explained the approach of trying to accuse 
certain people of being either a nebulous of State Capture, 
either being involved with the State Capture because either 
by association of – or otherwise, it doesn’t send an 
incentive to people to come and talk because the question 
that Counsel is asking me you would assume that the 
Commission is obviously very conscious with its own 
timeframes, you would assume that if for example these 
are actions of the Board, the Board acts through its 
10 
meetings and the actions of the Board by law are recorded 
in the minutes and in the resolutions. 
 
So you would expect investigators to ask questions 
because they cannot find the answers, but when you are 
being asked things that if it is being investigated it should 
be easy for the investigator to find that I must say Chair I 
am actually indebted with explanation that you have given 
to me but of course unfortunately Chair we are not dealing 
with the Chairperson, we are dealing with the people who 
are employed to do this kind of work and indeed if the 
20 
approach from the beginning is that the Chairperson has 
explained to me and what my – I mean Counsel is 
conveying now it would have been a different approach, 
completely.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take your Mr Mantsha and I am 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 67 of 118 
 
encouraged to hear that you feel a measure of reassurance 
from the remarks made by the learned Chairperson in that 
regard, but may I just ask you to look again at the letter, 
the recent letter at page 339.  Page 339 says: 
“The investigations of the Commission reveal that 
you were a member of the Board of Directors of 
Denel SOC Limited.” 
Now that is not an accusation, that is simply a statement of 
fact, which is either correct or not.  
MR MANTSHA:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then the Chair – sorry not the 
Chairperson, the secretary of the Commission, Professor 
Mesala says, paragraph 2: 
“I write to you at the direction of the Commission’s 
legal team in order to request that you furnish the 
commission on or before Wednesday 14 October 
with an affidavit in which you respond to the 
questions set out in paragraph 4 below and give 
your full version in relation thereto.  If you require 
assistance etcetera ...” 
20 
We don’t need to go through that, there was a suggestion 
that if you needed assistance that would be provided by 
the commission with no cost to you, and then the questions 
are put; paragraph 4: 
“In your capacity as a director at Denel you are 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 68 of 118 
 
requested to give your full version justifying the 
decisions that were taken by the Board in 2015 and 
2016.” 
Two, and then we see A to G and I gave you some 
examples of that.  I don’t think we need to deal with the 
remainder of the letter in detail it indicates to you the legal 
basis on which it is said that the commission is entitled to 
issue a directive and/or summons any person to submit an 
affidavit or appear before the Commission etcetera, and it 
gives a deadline.  There is nothing in this letter would you 
10 
concede that says the following has already been – you 
have already been found guilty of something, or the 
following findings have already been made, not so?   It is 
simply is neutral it is saying the Commission would like you 
to answer certain questions, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well with respect Chairperson both act 
through High Courts. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry just speak up please.   
MR MANTSHA:   Both acts through the Courts and 
Chairperson I don’t want – I am not here to justify 
20 
anything, I am here to explain what has happened, what I 
have experienced and when a question comes to me to say 
justify the decision, the decisions of the board are contained 
in minutes in the board resolutions and it is simple and easy 
for the commission to understand the basis upon which all 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 69 of 118 
 
these decisions were taken.  Sorry Chair.  That is why for me 
because these were not my personal decisions.  It was fair 
enough to refer to those documents which has contained 
these decisions.  It was not to say I am not cooperating.   
If you ask me questions in my capacity as a Chair I 
will then give you the actions of the board which are 
contained in the minutes and in the resolution.  So that is 
why I attach this document because then you see this was 
the reasoning and that is why these decisions were taken.  If 
Counsel wants to get to a point that I was not cooperating 
10 
that I reject is not correct.   
I have already expressed to the Chairperson that the 
message out there – not only to me but to many other 
people. It is different it is not the Chairperson who is 
communicating with us.  It is not the Chairperson who is 
telling us this that the message out there is accusation and 
accusation and lambastes people as enablers of state 
capture and given all sorts of names.  But if the idea from 
Counsel is to say you were not cooperating that is not 
correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I was simply asking you to look at the 
document in light of your earlier evidence that – that people 
had made findings against you that you had been tainted by 
state capture and a simple point is that is not apparent from 
this letter, not so? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 70 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:  I think Chair I – I think I have already 
explained myself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you the… 
MR MANTSHA:  The reason why I reacted the way I have 
reacted. I do not think it is – I have to repeat because 
otherwise I would be repeating what I have answered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No we are not asking you to repeat 
anything – please do not Mr Mantsha we have precious little 
time and we would like to move on.  So if you want to say 
anything you have not said already you welcome to do so 
10 
subject to the Chair’s guidance but I certainly do not want 
you to repeat anything.  Thank you.  Can I now take you to 
page 321.  This is a further letter from an official of the 
commission.  This is dated earlier than the one we looked at 
earlier and that is the 19 February 2020, do you see that? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And that was issued by – on the 
following page 322 by Ms Bridget Tshabalala the then acting 
secretary of the Judicial Commission, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  I do. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you receive this letter? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes the letter was received. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes you received it in February did 
you? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja – yes it was received in February. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 71 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And thereto the commission’s 
official then says in paragraph 2. 
“This 
letter 
serves 
to 
confirm 
that 
the 
commission is looking into allegations of 
state capture, corruption and fraud involving 
several public entities and other organs of 
state pursuant to the commission’s terms of 
reference.  As part of the investigations into 
the affairs of Denel SOC Limited and the 
greater scope of the state capture inquiry we 
10 
are investigating various matters involving 
yourself.” 
Would you agree that they are not saying we have 
made any findings?  They simply investigating allegations 
that have been made by other, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. And would you appreciate 
particularly as an experienced and qualified attorney with 
knowledge of constitutional, administrative law and the like 
that of course is a matter of law.  Nobody can make findings 
20 
that have any binding force in any event in relation to the 
commission’s work other than the learned Chairperson of the 
commission, Correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  It is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. And then the – the acting 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 72 of 118 
 
secretary says this – paragraph 4. 
“We 
have 
compiled 
a 
list 
of 
questions 
attached hereto as annexure A which you are 
required to respond to in the form of an 
affidavit 
detailing 
information 
required 
including 
supporting 
documents 
where 
possible.” 
And it says: 
“The 
commission 
urgently 
requires 
the 
affidavit to be delivered within ten…” 
10 
I see it say ten in the word and then the – in 
numerals in brackets 15 calendar days.  Be that as it may.  
What then follows at page 323 is an eight page – sorry it is 
in fact a six page document that runs to page 329 setting out 
a number of questions, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you received these questions at 
the time you received the letter that came with it? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And I am just going to look at 
20 
the headings so that we see what the questions relate to.  
Paragraph 1 on page 323.  It is the Gupta’s and Associates 
relationship and then it says for example: 
“Who introduced you to the Gupta family and 
what was the purpose of the introduction.” 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 73 of 118 
 
The next topic at page 324 paragraph 2 is the Denel 
VR Laser Joint Venture and as an example 2.1 
“How and when did you become aware of the 
Denel Asia Joint Venture based on your 
knowledge 
who 
introduced 
the 
idea 
or 
concept 
to 
the 
Denel 
board 
provide 
evidence.” 
And then on page 328 there is reference in paragraph 
3 to the Pakistan deal and paragraph 4 to the Chad's deal.  
Now did you reply to this? 
10 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson I did not reply.  It was purely a 
matter of oversight.  The moment in time when this letter 
was received by my office there were very serious matters 
that I was handling for other people that relates to the work 
of this commission.  It was an oversight on my side.  The 
letter received; the letter is put in the file and at this time 
there were matters that… 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Sorry 
please 
speak 
into 
the 
microphone. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
There 
were 
matters 
that 
of 
course 
20 
preoccupied and it was an oversight on my part and I 
omitted. And to that Chairperson of course I am sorry that 
there was an oversight on my part and I did not respond to 
this. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So we should not read into it any 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 74 of 118 
 
deliberate refusal to cooperate? 
MR MANTSHA:  Not at all Chairperson.  I think the next 
minute I got into this is when now the bundles are being 
sent.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  And as preparing with my legal team of 
course we then picked this was not answered.  But as I 
explained Chairperson my apologies to that but it was 
clearly, clearly oversight. Sometime we forget about our own 
personal matters and focus on ourselves – on other matters 
10 
and this was a very difficult time in my – in my life. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  When that was received. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No I understand and I empathise as a 
legal practitioner.  It is true that sometimes we – we tend to 
give more time and attention to clients’ interests and 
sometimes our own.  But this was not something like a 
plumber’s bill that you had to pay.  Although plumbers are 
also important to deal with.  This was – this was something 
very serious that came on behalf of the Chairperson of a 
20 
Judicial Commission of Inquiry appointed no less than by the 
President and relating to huge matters of public importance 
it just seems to me a little problematic that you confirm 
having received this and overlooking it. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson I cannot say more than 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 75 of 118 
 
the apologies that I have given. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.   
MR MANTSHA:  And the reasons for me not to react and to 
[00:08:41]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you.  Alright thank you Mr 
Mantsha can I just before we leave this.  Were you dealing 
with clients in your professional capacity as an attorney to 
assist 
them 
in 
relation 
processes 
of 
this 
commission 
concerning those clients? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well amongst other things yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Okay thank you.  Now is it also 
correct that we as the legal team requested you to cooperate 
with the legal team in preparation for this hearing by 
consulting with us? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I got that request Chairperson true but 
I am sufficiently represented a very senior attorney on my 
side and a very experienced senior counsel.  My attorney 
responded to say no whatever you want you can tell us and 
then we can look at that.  There was no idea of trying not to 
cooperate.  There have been correspondences between my 
20 
attorney and the commission as far as that request is 
concerned. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  I would like to ask you one final 
point about the level of cooperation or the level at which you 
may have cooperated or not cooperated and that is this.  
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 76 of 118 
 
When you look at the fact – these facts you do not respond 
at all due to an oversight you say to a very detailed list of 
questions which as the Chairperson – sorry dealing with 
matters which the Chairperson has already referred to as 
something that the commission would have welcomed if you 
had assisted from the beginning. It could have saved some 
time. 
 
Secondly the fact that when you did cooperate and 
we thank you for that by providing the three affidavits that 
we have taken you to they are extremely brief.  In fact very 
10 
sparse.  I can give you as an example at the other end of the 
spectrum for example a witness who testified yesterday Mr 
Burger who – who himself has been the subject of a number 
of allegations and he felt – he felt he was innocent and 
wanted to clear his name.  He put in an affidavit.  I believe it 
was the main affidavit was 188 pages just the affidavit let 
alone many pages of annexures.  That may be an extreme 
example because others have given more like 30/40 pages 
whatever.   
 
That the third point is that when we as the legal team 
20 
asked to consult with you you did not consult.  It is true that 
your attorney wrote back – did give a response at least that 
was not overlooked and indicated if there was anything 
specific we could raise it with them but not to have a 
consultation. It just seems to – sorry I will give you a chance 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 77 of 118 
 
to respond may I just finish the question. 
 
Can I just suggest to you that unlike many other 
witnesses not all… 
MR MANTSHA:  My apologies Counsel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Not all witnesses in this commission 
both in relation to the Denel stream and other streams.  The 
commission has had a range of varying responses or non-
responses from witnesses it just seems that your response 
appears to have been very patchy.  Please respond. 
MR MANTSHA:  Chairperson what is happening I think Mr 
10 
Burger eluded in his affidavit.  What these investigators who 
are employed by the commission they interrogate people to 
accept whatever narrative they are coming with. 
 
So I of course do not want to subject myself in unfair 
process.  It is not correct that there was no reason for me 
not to consult with the commission.  The reasons given by 
the commission were not such that we can form a conclusion 
that look the commission is out here; it is asking us this 
information because of very good reasons. 
 
So there has been nullified, there has been people 
20 
being put under very serious interrogation.  And of course I 
did not want to subject myself to that.  I have got a legal 
team which is capable of whether it is  500 pages of an 
affidavit we can do but in conclusion Chair if all of this is 
meant to show that I disrespected this commission that is not 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 78 of 118 
 
true. 
 
I cooperated to an extent on the basis of the 
information that I have.  I did not of course want to expose 
myself to what I regard as unfair tactics by some of the 
commission’s investigators.  So I did not want to get 
involved.  But at no stage as I said Chair when you 
explained to me and if that was the message that everyone 
out there is getting as the Chair has explained we would 
have been the first day came here with loads and loads of 
things and say Chairperson I want to share this with you.   
10 
 
So again if Counsel is trying to say I did not 
cooperate with the commission it is not correct.  On the face 
of other documents that I might not have responded to I 
profoundly apologise Chairperson.  Here I am. I am here to 
engage.  I am here to explain the part of my board.  I am 
here to explain my part.  I am here to share whatever 
experience that I have that might be relevant to what the 
commission is looking for.  And I am here in good faith.  That 
is what I can say Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Well on behalf of the legal team may 
20 
we say we commend you at least for coming today and we 
thank you for that.  And can you confirm that you will 
cooperate fully with the questionings – the questioning that 
we are going to put to you? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well with respect Chairperson I mean I do 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 79 of 118 
 
not think I have to answer that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  When you refer to interrogation 
of course that is a term that for example in the apartheid era 
had terrible connotations of torture and so forth.  You in fact 
have never been interviewed by the investigators, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:  Ja but I… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  It is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you have not actually been 
interrogated.  In fact you said you did not want to subject 
10 
yourself to interrogation, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  But yes I have read the evidence of people 
who have been subjected like Burger who described. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes but that is not your own personal 
knowledge, is it? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I would not – I would not – it is not my 
personal knowledge. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  But he would not have said that if that was 
not correct.  
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And just a final point on this.  The 
request for the consultation that I was referring to earlier 
that was made by the legal team was not made by the 
investigators.  There is an investigation team and a legal 
team  In fact that will be clear if not to your own legal team 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 80 of 118 
 
it would have been clear very easily from a – any casual 
look at the – at the commission’s website. 
 
Now we were the ones as the legal team asking you 
to cooperate by way of a consultation which did not take 
place.  So surely any perceived – any perceived heavy 
handedness on the part of investigators that you yourself 
had not personally received should be surely irrelevant to 
a legal team three members of the Bar wanting to consult 
with you.  And instead we are simply told in an email well if 
you want to raise anything specifically do it by way of 
10 
email but we are not going to join you in a consultation 
even if as we permitted they had come along to the 
consultation.  We were quite happy.   
We 
had 
plenty 
of 
consultations 
with 
various 
witnesses where they have accompanied by their legal 
representatives 
and 
we 
have 
heard 
out 
the 
legal 
representatives if they had any difficulties.  It just seems 
to us as the legal team to be a little disappointing and 
concerning that the attitude on your part has been so 
resistant and so suspicious about the commission and its 
20 
work. 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson I cannot say more than 
what I have said. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you. 
MR MANTSHA:  I – I have cooperated to an extent where I 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 81 of 118 
 
thought my legal position is and I have not obstructed the 
work of this commission.  I am here.  I am here to explain 
what I know to the commission. 
 
I have already told you Chairperson that the manner 
in which things have been done is such that it – people 
resent it because either lack of the reasons or a proper 
explanation was [00:18:39].  So I do not think I should 
come here and try to go to your things.  It is suffice 
Chairperson to say I have been here also representing 
other people.   
10 
So I am not – I am not saying I do not recognise the 
commission or undermining the authority of the commission 
or the Chairperson.  I have represented people in this 
commission. 
 
I 
am 
still 
representing 
people 
in 
this 
commission.  And there have been affidavits we have been 
sending, there have been correspondence that they have 
been sending in my capacity as an attorney so there is no 
anything.   
If I disagree with a request Chairperson and we 
look at the request and by the way for a legal team to be in 
20 
this commission somebody has to pay.  For a legal team to 
be in consultation with the commission legal advisors 
somebody has to pay it.  So I – that cannot be used to say 
I am obstructive or I am not cooperating.  So I cannot say 
more than what I have explained Chairperson. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 82 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you Mr Mantsha.  May 
we now deal with some of the events that took place in 
relation to your chairpersonship of the board of Denel.  If 
we can take you to one of your affidavits – if we can take 
you to page 331.  You there are dealing as we have 
established already with a response to various statements 
made by Mr Salugee in his affidavit and what you say if I 
may quote into the record paragraph 6 you say: 
“I was appointed by the then Cabinet of the 
Republic of South Africa as a chairperson 
10 
and I deny that I was appointed to capture 
Denel for the benefit of the Gupta family.  
Long before my appointment as the board 
chairperson Mr Salugee had already signed 
an agreement on behalf of presumably 
Denel to partner with VR Laser a company 
associated with the Gupta family.” 
Now there are you referring to the partnership between 
Denel and VR Laser in relation to the Asia deal?  Is that 
right? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What are you referring to then? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson what I am referring here 
is VR Laser had already signed an agreement or a 
memorandum with Denel and VR Laser was already 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 83 of 118 
 
involved in Hoefyster Project which was like – is it eleven 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry involved with?  Just please try 
and speak up a bit? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
The 
South 
African 
Defence 
Force 
appointed Denel to execute a project called Hoefyster. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  And this was of course long before my 
appointment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So are you referring to the contract – 
there has been a great deal of evidence we do not need to 
10 
cover again. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Unless it is necessary.  There was a – 
there were three contracts that we have been dealing with 
primarily in evidence the past few weeks.  The one is the 
Hoefyster Platform Hulls contract.  The second was a 
single supply contract between DLS and VR Laser and the 
third was a similar single supply contract between DVS and 
VR Laser.  You aware of those three contracts? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Are you referring here to the 
agreement relating to the Hoefyster Platform Hulls? 
MR MANTSHA:  I am referring here to the first agreement. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes which one? 
MR MANTSHA:  That I have been told.  The first 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 84 of 118 
 
agreement which Denel has entered with VR. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes which one does that relate to of 
the three Mr Mantsha try and help me? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I think Counsel if we take the 
sequence of this relationship. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  Between Denel and VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:  You will then see that the first agreement 
which 
was 
signed 
between 
VR 
Laser 
and 
– 
sorry 
10 
Chairperson – between VR Laser and Denel was signed 
some time before our appointment.  I am referring to that 
first agreement which Denel and VR signed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  That is the agreement I am referring to. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I fully understand that I am simply 
quickly trying to get to the point.  Was that the agreement, 
the first agreement that related to the Hoefyster Platform 
Hulls?  Is that what you referring to?  That is my 
understanding of the facts but it is your evidence not mine.  
20 
So if I am wrong the answer is no it is xyz.  If the answer 
is yes the answer is yes.  Is it the Platform Hulls contract 
or is it the single supply contracts? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well my understanding of the agreement 
which 
was 
signed 
it 
was 
a 
relationship 
agreement 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 85 of 118 
 
partnership agreement.  Yes it covered the Hoefyster 
Project.  This is my understanding as we entered into the 
company. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And when you entered into the 
company you saying that had already been concluded some 
time before? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And we are in agreement with you the 
Hoefyster contract was signed in 2014 before you started 
in July 2015.  Right thank you.  Now when you say you 
10 
were appointed as chairperson by the then Cabinet of the 
Republic that was when the Cabinet was chaired by the 
then President Mr Jacob Zuma, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:  President Zuma yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now reference has been made 
to the fact that and if it is not a fact you must correct it 
please that at a certain stage you have acted or may still 
be acting for former President Zuma, is that correct as an 
attorney? 
MR MANTSHA:  I think it is a public knowledge. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you confirm it? 
MR MANTSHA:  Of course it is [00:25:06]. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Were you acting as Mr – 
former President Zuma as his attorney at this stage when 
you were appointed as the chairperson of Denel? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 86 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Not.  When did that come about? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I – I acted for former President as 
from 2018 if I… 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  2018? 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So that was some years after you 
were appointed as chairperson of the Denel board? 
MR MANTSHA:  In fact after I have left them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  After you had left the board right and 
10 
that was in February that you left. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 2018.  Right.  Did you know the 
former President Zuma before your appointment? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well knowing him how? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Or in any way?  You were not as his 
attorney.  Did you know him socially or through business? 
MR MANTSHA:  Of course I knew President Zuma.  I know 
any other business to do with him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I see.  And what was the nature of 
your knowing him?  Was it a social contact or business 
20 
contact? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I met the President in political 
meetings. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  And ja that was it. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 87 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay and then former President 
Zuma’s son Duduzane have you acted as his attorney? 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  At any stage?  Not at all. 
MR MANTSHA:  No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you.  Alright now I would 
like to – you to please then refer to your paragraph 7 at 
page 331.  You say: 
“I do not re – I did not request to meet Mr Salugee I did not 
direct him that the meeting would take place at the Gupta 
10 
residence.  My recollection of the event is that Mr Essa 
convened the meeting and he requested me to attend.” 
Now this is referring to evidence that Mr Salugee gave 
previously relating to a particular meeting at the Gupta 
residence in the suburb of Saxonwold.  Now do you confirm 
that you went to a meeting at the Gupta residence in 
Saxonwold? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson firstly let me correct the 
wording of this statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes this is what… 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Of your affidavit. 
MR MANTSHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because the paragraph you wanted to 
correct here. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Right. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 88 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Who requested who Chairperson.  I do not 
recall I will make a supplementary affidavit on that despite 
many years ago.  Whether I attended this meeting yes I 
did.  I attended this meeting at the Gupta’s residence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you.  So when you said 
in your affidavit  
“I did not request to meet Mr Salugee” 
Is it possible that you may have you just cannot recall? 
MR MANTSHA:  Of course it might have been possible that 
I am the one who conveyed. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:  The meeting to him or he is the one who 
conveyed the meeting to him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Fine. 
MR MANTSHA:  Or Mr Essa could have been the one who 
conveyed the meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you.  At this stage were 
you already the chairperson of the Denel? 
MR MANTSHA:  At this stage I think I was. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  I see.  So then I would like to go back 
20 
right to the very beginning before you became Chairperson 
did you know Mr Salugee at all? 
MR MANTSHA:  No I did not know Mr Salugee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you meet him for the first time 
when you became chairperson? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 89 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:  Well I think when we were in London and 
when we were trying to share experiences we then got to a 
possibility that we could have been met – we could have 
met each other around 1992 in a particular political event. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MANTSHA:  So when I was sharing my recollection of 
the event so he also described his and said I was there.  
And there is a high probability the person I have met him in 
1992 it is him.  So – but beyond that no. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And had you prior to your appointment 
10 
as chairperson of the Denel board had any dealings with 
social or business or political or anything with any of the 
Gupta family or their business associates? 
MR MANTSHA:  Well Chairperson as I have already 
indicated 
I 
did 
met 
the 
Gupta 
family. 
 
They 
are 
stakeholders – they were stakeholders in the media 
industry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The media industry? 
MR MANTSHA:  In the course – in the course of my 
advising the then Minister of Communication yes I did meet 
20 
them before. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that included their ownership of 
the New Age ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And also ANN7 Television Station.  Is 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 90 of 118 
 
that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So you had met them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you remember, more or less, when 
you met them for the first time? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson I would not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   I would not remember exactly the month, 
the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe just the year. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   No, the year, it is around 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, around 2014? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay thank you.  And at that stage or 
any stage before you assumed the chairpersonship of the 
Denel Board, had you had any dealings social or business or 
political or otherwise with Mr Salim Essa? 
MR MANTSHA:   I have known Mr Salim Essa, I think, as 
early as, probably, 2014.  And I did not have any dealings 
20 
with him except, you know, social conversation and how are 
you and what have you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Would you describe as your 
relationship as a friendly one? 
MR MANTSHA:   With Mr Essa? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 91 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I did not have a friendship with him.  
Yes, he is – Mr Essa is a very friendly guy.  So he would 
greet, he would engage people in a conversation.  So.  Ja, 
that is all I can say. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you aware that Mr Salim Essa 
was a close business associate of the Gupta’s at that stage? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, the time I met him, of course, he was 
already related with them. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now, I have referred you to the 
10 
passage in your affidavit where you deal with the meeting at 
the Gupta residence in Saxonwold. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was that one of – was that the only 
one that ever took place at their residence or were there 
others that you attended meetings at their residence in 
Saxonwold? 
MR MANTSHA:   This was my first and last meeting. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you only went to the Saxonwold 
residence once? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no, no.  I am referring to this matter. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   I have been there several times.  I cannot 
tell you how many times but I have been there but 
...[intervenes]  
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 92 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, then I do not quite understand 
what you meant when you said it was the first and the last 
...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...meeting at the residence. 
MR MANTSHA:   This was the only meeting and the last 
meeting where there was a discussion which indirectly 
related to Denel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And when was that?  Was that before 
or after you had assumed the chairpersonship of Denel? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, of course, it was after I was 
appointed.  I am not sure which month, whatever the things 
but I think it was after I was appointed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you started, as we have seen, in 
July 2015. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   One of the people who attended was 
Mr Salugee, correct? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, Mr Salugee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he was there as the then DCEO of 
Denel, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now we know that you started in 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 93 of 118 
 
July 2015.  We also know, unless you correct me, that 
Mr Salugee was suspended in September 2015.   
MR MANTSHA:   Correct.  I think so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So barely three months after you had 
started as chairperson at Denel.  Presumable, you say you 
think it was after you started your chairpersonship.  And I am 
not trying to trick you up on there.  It could not have been 
after Mr Salugee was suspended, not so?  It must have been 
before his suspension. 
MR MANTSHA:   This meeting? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay.  I think, let me just put something in 
perspective 
here.  How I understand the relationship 
between Mr Salugee and Mr Essa.  My understanding of the 
relationship is, they come from the same locality. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, you say, they come from? 
MR MANTSHA:   They come from the same locality. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   From the same area.  They were friends 
and friends way before from where they come from.  And as I 
20 
understand, Mr Salugee with his exposure to the defence 
business helped Mr Essa to negotiate the sale of the VR 
Laser South Africa.   
 
So there was that cordial relationship according to my 
understanding of where they come from and where they were 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 94 of 118 
 
going.   
 
And again, I repeat Chairperson.  I assumed that the 
friendship and everything meant well.  I, of course there is a 
rebuttable presumption that we all meant well until we 
proved otherwise.   
 
So 
that 
is 
the 
context 
of 
the 
relationship, 
as 
I 
understood it, between the two.  A long relationship, from the 
same area.  Mr Salugee helped Mr Essa to acquire the VR 
Laser business.  That is my understanding Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Mantsha, did Mr Salugee ever 
10 
disclosed to you anything that might have been improper 
coming from the Gupta family or their associates conveyed 
to him in that prior relationship he had with them? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I think – I should say that I got along 
very well with Mr Salugee and we had number of one-on-one 
discussions.  We would make, we would have coffee.  I was 
supporting him, he was supporting me.  I did not, as I said, I 
mean, the relationship I assumed it meant well.  So was not 
suspecting 
that 
people 
are 
meeting 
because 
there 
is 
anything.  I was not suspecting Mr Salugee of anything.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I would like to read to you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am not sure that your 
answered the question.  I think the question was whether 
Mr Salugee ever disclosed to you anything improper that 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 95 of 118 
 
Mr Salim Essa may have or the Gupta’s may have asked of 
him. 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, I do not remember anything 
like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I may draw your attention to one of 
the 
affidavits 
that 
Mr Salugee 
has 
provided 
to 
this 
Commission.  Is it correct that you were asked by the 
Commission to have regard to his affidavits and in particular 
10 
to particular passages, to pay particular attention to that?  Is 
that correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   It is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that is why you, in fact, responded 
to some of those in the affidavit that I have take you to that 
you have signed, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  I would just like to read to you, 
I am not going to take you to the actual affidavit.  But Chair, 
it is at the Denel Bundle 10 at page 801.  I do not believe it 
20 
is necessary for your registrar ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Then ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...to bring it out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not want to waste time and I do 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 96 of 118 
 
not think this should be remotely controversial.  This is what 
Mr Salugee said.  I am simply going to ask Mr Mantsha if – 
when he says this, if that was ever conveyed to him, 
Mr Mantsha.   
 
This is what Mr Salugee said Mr Mantsha. 
“It was Rajesh Tony Gupta who asked me why I did 
not “take money like everyone else”. 
As I have indicated, I rejected his advances. 
I assumed he meant that there were individuals who 
at request, this was contained in my original 
10 
statement.” 
 
Did he relate to you at any stage, particularly while you 
were chairperson of the organisation, that Mr Gupta had 
specific – Mr Tony Gupta had specifically asked him, 
Salugee:  Why do you not take money like everyone else?  
Had he ever told you that? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What do you think about it now, now 
that you have heard about it?  Presumable, you must have 
seen that in his affidavit.  Am I right?  Or am I telling you 
20 
this for the first time? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, of course, the allegation relates to 
Mr Gupta.  It does not relate to me.  So.  Of course, I really 
do not have to answer that.  But all I can say, it was never 
conveyed to me. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 97 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  With respect, I think it is really 
for the Chairperson to decide whether you can be expected 
to answer the question.  Why I suggest to you that perhaps 
you should is this.   
 
And here, I am not putting to you, for example, that the 
Gupta’s said to you:  Why do you not take mosey?  Let alone 
that the Gupta’s paid you any money.  That is not the focus 
of mu question remotely.   
 
What I am saying is, that Mr Salugee has given evidence 
in the Commission that this is what he was told by one of the 
10 
Gupta’s.  The evidence has also been heard by this 
Commission that the Gupta’s were heavily involved in the VR 
Laser business.   
 
The omission has also heard evidence and you, in fact, 
touched on this and we are going to come back to it but 
there was also a particular meeting at the Gupta residence in 
which you and others participated, discussing business 
deals.   
 
The Commission has also heard various evidence that a 
number of transactions were concluded between VR Laser, 
20 
owned by Mr Salim Essa, one of the business associates and 
controlled as part of the Oak Bay Group of Companies.   
 
But a number of very lucrative contracts were concluded 
between Denel and VR Laser.  Some of them may well have 
been 
concluded 
outside 
the 
time 
that 
you 
were 
the 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 98 of 118 
 
chairperson.  I accept that  Let us not go into that.   
 
May we please go into, really, the thrust of my question 
which is this.  Does it not concern you now that, particularly 
where the spotlight of the Commission is now being placed 
on, what happened at Denel, that behind the scenes of these 
various transactions, one of the Gupta’s had, according to 
Mr Salugee, approached him to try and encourage him to 
personally benefit by receiving money, which Mr Salugee 
says he resisted.   
 
But at least, are you not concerned with the benefit of 
10 
hindsight, knowing that Mr Salugee had said this, that 
apparently, 
according 
to 
Mr Salugee, 
he 
was 
directly 
encouraged by Mr Gupta to accept money.  In other words a 
bribe.   
 
Does that not give you concern that transactions that 
were being presented to you and reported on to you at the 
level of the board which you chaired may have been tainted 
by offers of brides?  Not to you but to others.  Does that 
concern you? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I think Chair.  Let me reply as follows.  
20 
It is my concern irrespective of anyone for officials of public 
entities to accept bribes.  I am completely against that.  So if 
indeed a situation like that had occurred, of course, I am 
concerned about it.   
 
But just to go further.  There was no situation under my 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 99 of 118 
 
leadership of the board, in my board, where there was a 
contract which was presented to us and we were supposed 
to approve that contract.  Never.   
 
Of course, there is a Denel Asia matter which relate to 
Mr Essa as a shareholder of that company.  And just to put it 
into proper context.   
 
I am not here to speculate Chairperson about what other 
people said that other said to them.  I think it is up to the 
Chairperson to look at that kind of evidence, whether in 
terms of the mandate of the person is something that the 
10 
Chairperson should express anything.   
 
So I am not going to speculate, other than to say, I am 
completely against it.  Have I known about that, I would have 
sharply raised that matter but I cannot comment in a matter 
like that as a matter of fact that it happened.   
 
I do not know it happened.  I think Mr Gupta must be 
given that benefit of doubt to actually put his version.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I...  Certainly, we do not want to 
speculate, number one but number two, the question or your 
previous question that Mr Kennedy had asked, I think was 
20 
legitimate to say, did Mr Salugee ever share with you or 
report to you what he has told this Commission had 
happened, namely that Mr Tony Gupta sought to get him to 
agree to take money.  So that was a legitimate question, to 
say:  Did he ever report something like this to you? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 100 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:   No, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Would you not 
agree Mr Mantsha that you as the Group Chief Executive 
Officer...  Oh, sorry the Group Chairperson of the board 
would have expected Mr Salugee, if this had happened, in 
his capacity as Group CEO, to have reported to you? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Surely, this is the sort of thing you that 
you would expecting to report. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, firstly.  We all have got a 
legal obligation to report crime to the police.  The first thing I 
would have expected Mr Salugee to do, was to go to the 
police and report that so and so has attempted to bribe me 
and these are the reasons and opened a police case.  I 
would have expected that.   
 
And of course, I would have expected Mr Salugee to 
raise it with me, to say look this is what is what is 
happening.   
 
But what I know Chairperson is that the only meeting 
20 
that I have attended when Mr Salugee was present and 
Mr Essa was present in the Gupta residence.  There was a 
discussion about Mr Salugee assisting Mr Essa to buy out 
the private shareholders of LMT.  At that stage Chairperson, 
I did not even know what LMT stood for.  So.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 101 of 118 
 
 
And that discussion was fairly in terms of what I was 
listening there.  The discussion started to that Mr Essa 
wanted to buy out the shareholders of LMT who were private 
shareholders and Mr Salugee was assisting him as he 
assisted him, according to my understanding Chairperson.   
 
I was not there when it happened but my understanding 
is.  Yes, he assisted him with VR Laser.  My understanding 
is, he is assisted.  In that meeting, they were discussing 
assisting Mr Essa with LMT shares. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me ask you this question.  I have 
10 
seen how you have dealt with that meeting in your affidavit.  
I think you said you were asked to make comments and you 
had no comments because you did not even know what LMT 
was at that stage and all of that.  Did you have any 
appreciation of why you were asked to attend that meeting? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, I think, I understood why I had to 
attend the meeting.  You know out of the private discussion 
that I had with Mr Salugee was:  Chair, look we worked 
together and we then agreed that if the exposure to external 
people is no good and then I would try as much as possible 
20 
to be a buffer in terms of him not engaging in the external 
forces because it always create pressure to a Chief 
Executive.  So we had that kind of understanding.  And I 
went there, blank as I was.   
 
Of course, I could not comment because I would 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 102 of 118 
 
otherwise be very stupid because I did not know the issue.  
But for me, it was more for my Chief Executive Officer that I 
agreed that external pressures, we will deal with it.  Let us 
avoid meetings which might put pressures to you.  And that 
was the way we wanted to work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, I just want to make sure I understand 
this.  Are you saying that there had been a discussion 
between yourself and Mr Salugee along those lines on how 
to handle these requests for meetings by certain people from 
the outside people?  Or are you saying there had been a 
10 
discussion between the two of you? 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
Well, 
Chairperson 
the 
state-owned 
companies operate within a political environment.  And we 
discussed that look ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We, being yourself and Mr Salugee? 
MR MANTSHA:   And Mr Salugee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   But I would deal with the politics of it and 
concentrate on the business.  So we were working on that 
basis to say, I would deal whomever the politician is, I will 
20 
deal with that rather than for you to have pressure.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I may be misunderstand.  I thought 
that that meeting was quite early in your term.  Actually, 
when Mr Salugee gave evidence, the impression I have of 
his evidence is that the meeting – I think he spoke about two 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 103 of 118 
 
meetings if I am not mistaken that he said he had attended 
at the Gupta residence in which you were present.  I may be 
mistaken.   
 
But the first one, at least, if there were two.  He said Mr 
Salim Essa was the first person to tell him about you being 
the new chairperson of the new board.   
 
I think he said, actually, Mr Salim Essa put it to him on 
the basis that he wanted Mr Salugee to meet the new person 
or somebody who is going to be the new chairperson of the 
board or a new chairperson of the board.   
10 
 
But certainly, I gained the impression that one, he did 
not know, heard of being told by Mr Salim Essa that you 
were going to be the new chairperson or you were already 
the new chairperson of the board.  That is the impression I 
got from his affidavit which you have read.  I do not know 
whether you got the same impression. 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson the reality is.  The 
appointment was made by cabinet.  I am not sure if it was 
May or April, whatever the case.  That cabinet decision, I 
think 24 May or whatever the case may be.   
20 
 
So, of course, people in the space new that the cabinet 
has approved a new board.  I cannot confirm the discussion 
between Mr Essa and Mr Salugee.  I was not there.  All I can 
say is what came to my knowledge.  Immediately, when the 
former, Mr Salugee knew that I was appointed, we started to 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 104 of 118 
 
have interactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even before the meeting in which involved 
Mr Salem Essa, yourself and Mr Salugee? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you might not recall? 
MR MANTSHA:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you might not recall the sequence. 
MR MANTSHA:   I cannot recall the sequence, which 
meeting came first.  That I cannot recall.  We had our 
introduction meetings and we discussed where we want to 
10 
work, what we expect from one another and we really struck 
a very good relationship.  I liked Mr Salugee.  I think – I 
respect him.  I think he did the same to me.  So we were 
getting well together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your recollection that your first 
interaction of him was independent from Mr Salim Essa? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you cannot remember? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was independent of Mr Salim Essa? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Look, I think...  Chair, you are asking me a 
very difficult question because, as I have already said to 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Mr Essa and Mr Salugee ...[intervenes]  
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 105 of 118 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   They knew each other. 
MR MANTSHA:   They knew each other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And he was strangely(?) ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
MANTSHA: 
 
 
What 
they 
were 
talking 
between 
themselves, I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   I do not know. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   But when I met Mr Salugee for the first 
time, he has never mentioned to me that he has requested to 
meet me because of Mr Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   I took it, he is meeting me as the new 
chairperson of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MANTSHA:   And even the discussions we had were 
confined to the truth. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANTSHA:   How are we going to work together.  He 
briefed me about certain challenges that the company was 
going through.  It was not about other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 106 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Kennedy.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  I just want us 
before we get to the time where we are going to adjourn.  
Just to pick up a point that you have raised earlier.   
 
And that is that Mr Salugee did not tell you that he had 
been told by Tony Gupta that why do you not take the money 
like the rest of you, and you confirmed that that was not told 
to you and you only discovered that in the course of what 
has come out in this Commission.   
10 
 
Can I just ask you hypothetically?  If you just put 
yourself in this situation just to assist the Commission.  If 
you had known that from Mr Salugee, if and when you 
assumed your position as chairperson of the board and the 
CEO had disclosed, as he should have, that he had been 
made this improper approach by Mr Tony Gupta in the 
context of VR Laser a Gupta associated company doing 
business with Denel.   
 
Presumable, you would have taken that seriously.  And 
secondly, quite apart from what Mr Salugee should have 
20 
done by laying a criminal charge or a complaint to the South 
African Police.   
 
Presumable, it would have affected your attitude as 
Denel chairperson as to whether any business should be 
done by Denel with VR Laser or any associative of the 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 107 of 118 
 
Gupta’s if this sort of improper offer was being made.  Would 
you agree? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, of course I would have been opposed 
to that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   Vigorously. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   And I would not want the business to be 
associated with those kinds of things. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Exactly.  Particularly, because, number 
10 
one, legally you should not be doing business as a state-
owned institution with anybody who is offering bribes to your 
most senior member of management, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, true but I think where you are getting 
to ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, do not worry where I am getting 
to. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja, but let me answer you because 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just answer the question where I was 
20 
at not where I am getting to. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  Because I have already answered 
you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Whether a bribe was offered by Mr Gupta or 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 108 of 118 
 
anybody to Mr Salugee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   I do not know.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   You are asking me to a hypothetical 
situation. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Exactly. 
MR MANTSHA:   I have already explained to you that I am 
opposed of those activities. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   And anyone where those activities 
happened, if that person is law-abiding, would go to the 
police before he goes to anybody else. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I understand that but ...[intervenes]  
MR MANTSHA:   That person would report it to the 
authorities and that person would report it to the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Exactly. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  My board has got no record of that 
report. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, I understand your evidence and 
20 
frankly, with respect, you do not need to repeat it.   
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We have heard your evidence that it 
was not reported and my question is put in a hypothetical 
basis.  What if he had done that?   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 109 of 118 
 
 
So the one thing would be that legally it would not be 
appropriate for a state institution to do business with any 
entity that is offering bribes to its senior employees or to any 
employee for that matter.   
 
There was a second aspect, not so?  And that is this.  
That surely you do not want to reputational damage to the 
person... Oh, sorry.  To the entity of which you were the 
chairperson 
because 
that 
could 
be 
hugely 
damaging, 
correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   True. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Of course, we know exactly that 
exactly that type of damage has happened to Denel because 
of the allegations of State Capture, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  Chairperson, just to add on that.  The 
internal protocol of the company.  There is a whistle-blower 
mechanism. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.   
MR MANTSHA:   There is internal audit.  And of course, 
Denel operating in the environment it does, where there are 
a lot of attempts of underhanded matters.  There are 
20 
vigorous mechanisms to try to enforce non-corrupt practises.   
 
So internally, the mechanism – he, of course, did not 
even have to disclose the whistle-blower.  A very protective 
system within the company.  It would processed by Internal 
Audit.   
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 110 of 118 
 
 
Internal Audit had outside people and all sorts of things.  
Yes, side activities cannot be tolerated and we would not 
have tolerated it had we known an activity like that indeed 
took place or it was reported to us. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.  Thank you.  May I just 
conclude, if I may Chair with just a question or two on a 
further aspect you have raised in the opening statement.  
And that is that you yourself did not receive anything 
improper from the Gupta’s or their associates, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you did not receive any 
inappropriate benefit from them? 
MR MANTSHA:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you complaint that false 
allegations were made about your travelling overseas at their 
expense and you told the Chair, as I recall in your opening 
statement, you did travel a number of times overseas in your 
official capacity as chairperson but that was always at your 
own expense, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson let me just correct.  I did 
20 
not travel at their expense. I have travelled at my own 
expense.  As far as the – any benefit is concerned.  No 
benefit I have received.  And those travelling that he is 
referring about, I did so in my own personal capacity.  The 
…[intervenes] 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 111 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your personal capacity or – I 
understood you earlier to say, I may have wrong, I 
understood you earlier to say in your official capacity as 
the Chairperson.  Was it in your personal capacity? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, that is absolutely very wrong.  I 
think I was very specific. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he said there were some that he 
– there are occasions when he travelled in his personal 
capacity …[intervenes] 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there were occasions when he 
travelled in his capacity as Chairperson of the board. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then I missed that and I apologise.  
As I say, as I recall.  So there was some on your own 
personal behalf and others in your official capacity as 
Chairperson.  Let us just deal with the – when you were 
travelling in your official capacity.  Presumably Denel 
20 
should have paid for those costs, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, they have always covered those 
costs. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So they did.  Right and when you 
travelled for your own personal benefit, who paid those 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 112 of 118 
 
costs, the travel costs? 
MR MANTSHA:    I have always covered my costs. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you paid that yourself. 
MR MANTSHA:   I have covered my costs. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, can I take you please in the 
same bundle 8 to page 465? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   465.  This is an invoice, it appears, 
where Travel Excellence, apparently a travel agency, was 
invoicing West Dawn Investments in October 2015 for 
10 
certain travel arrangements on Emirates.  Now October 
2015 
was 
a 
few 
months 
after 
you 
assumed 
the 
Chairpersonship of Denel, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And this appears to invoice 
West Dawn Investments.  West Dawn Investments was a 
shareholder in VR Laser, correct? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   and West Dawn Investments was part 
of the Oakbay Group of companies, part of the Gupta 
20 
business empire, not so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, it seems so. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    It seems so? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You cannot dispute that, is that 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 113 of 118 
 
right? 
MR MANTSHA:   No, no, no, I am not disputing that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes.  Can I just qualify the question?  I 
knew that West Dawn …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Well, please do not qualify my 
question, you can qualify your answer. 
MR MANTSHA:   Okay.  No, no, no, I will qualify my 
answer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, Chairperson, I knew in December 
that West Dawn is a part of the VR.  And how did I know 
this?  I knew this, Chairperson, as a result of a due 
diligence report which was conducted on VR in the process 
of the work of Denel Asia who are the shareholders, how 
much is this shareholder receiving.  Yes, I knew. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So are you saying – you said 
December, did you? 
MR MANTSHA:   December 2015. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   2015? 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you saying you only learnt for the 
first time in December 2015 that West Dawn was involved 
in VR Laser and that the Guptas were involved in West 
Dawn? 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 114 of 118 
 
MR MANTSHA:   Well, Chairperson, I knew for the first in 
2015 as a result of the due diligence. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I am not asking you where you 
got that from, I am just trying to – indulge me, please. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I will just take you step by step. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You did not know before December 
2015 …[intervenes] 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That West Dawn had an interest in 
VR Laser and that the Guptas had an interest in West 
Dawn.  
MR MANTSHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So, in other words, the time that this 
invoice was issued in October 2015 you were not aware 
that West Dawn had an interest in. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes, Chair …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, thank you. 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, can I just explain about… 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANTSHA:   About what counsel is getting to. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   No, Mr Mantsha, please, you should, 
with respect, know that lawyers tend to …[intervenes] 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 115 of 118 
 
MR CILLIERS:  With respect, Mr Chairman, the witness has 
the right to explain an answer and that is all asked and Mr 
Kennedy should [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think the problem, Mr Cilliers, is 
that the witness did not say he wanted to explain his 
answer to this question, he said he wants to explain about 
I think where he is getting to, or something like that.  I 
think that is where the problem lies.  If he wants to explain 
his answer to that question, it is fine and if then he later 
on asks a question that he thinks where he is going, then 
10 
at that time he can answer and explain and, of course, in 
due course in re-examination you can pick it up and get 
him to explain whatever might not have been clarified.  I 
think – unless I did not hear him correctly, I think that is 
where the problem is.  If he wants to clarify his answer to 
this question, no problem, but I think he nods, I think that 
is – if that is that, there is no problem, but I think he was 
saying I think I know where Mr Kennedy is going and I want 
to clarify it before he gets there. 
MR CILLIERS:  But, Mr Chair …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in the end he will get a chance to 
clarify whatever he wants to clarify, it is just a question of 
timing. 
MR CILLIERS:  Mr Chair, if I may respond.  A witness has 
the right to put an answer and/or a situation in context and 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 116 of 118 
 
I know there is time constraints and it seems to me Mr 
Kennedy attempts to get to certain point before we have to 
take the adjournment but, with great respect, the fact that 
we have limited time left, only a minute or, we are already 
over out time, should not force a situation where the 
witness is not afforded a fair opportunity to put in context 
whatever he wants to put in context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me go back to the witness.  What did 
you want to do, Mr Mantsha? 
MR MANTSHA:   Chairperson, I wanted to give context 
10 
following from the answers that I have given which 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wanted to give context to your 
answer? 
MR MANTSHA:   To my answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the question. 
MR MANTSHA:   To the question that was asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I think you can do that. 
MR MANTSHA:   Ja.  And, Chairperson, what I am saying 
here is, as far as West Dawn is concerned, I have already 
20 
explained when did I know that they were the shareholders 
but in terms of my travelling arrangements, I have arranged 
my travelling through Ashu(?) who runs a side business 
and Ashu works for the Guptas, he runs a side travel 
business. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 117 of 118 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Ashu who? 
MR MANTSHA:   Ashu – I think Ashu Trowler(?)  Something 
like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Trowler. 
MR MANTSHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   And how did this happened?  This first 
happened with my trip to India.  The first trip to India and I 
have arranged through him, he told me the cost and I have 
settled with him.  So the information that appears, West 
10 
Dawn who or what, of course for the first time when these 
documents are given to me, that is where I see this.  So I 
cannot say how was he running his business.  But all I can 
say, is I pay for what I was supposed to pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   And he was assisting me with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MANTSHA:   So but I cannot really take the Chairman 
any further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MANTSHA:   About whether West Dawn or no West 
Dawn or which account, I cannot take the Chairperson 
further.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  I think that related 
to the question, it was a context to the question. 
13 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 306 
 
Page 118 of 118 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are five past, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are we at… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Would this be a 
convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think we should adjourn.  I am 
sorry to everybody that we cannot continue and finish but I 
have spoken to Mr Kennedy and to Mr Cilliers, we will 
make arrangements for Mr Mantsha to come back and to 
10 
continue and finish.  That will be arranged in due course. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, we are going to 
adjourn for the day. 
MR CILLIERS:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 16 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
   
20 
 
