 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
19 MARCH 2021 
 
 
DAY 364 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 331 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
19 MARCH 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 3 of 331 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 19 MARCH 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Our first witness is Ms Lynne Brown it 
is the former Minister of DPE Department of Public 
Enterprises.  Ms Brown is legally represented Chairperson 
10 
by my learned friend Mr Welcome Lusenga who will place 
himself on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can place yourself on record from 
where you are if your mic is working. 
ADV LUSENGA: Welcome Lusenga on behalf of Ms Brown 
Chair and just for the record I was with Mr – Advocate Sini 
Navala [?] when the brief started. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV LUSENGA:  She has not – he has now postponed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes I heard about that.  Yes.  Such a 
20 
pity.  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Good morning Ms Brown. 
MS BROWN:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you for availing 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 4 of 331 
 
yourself to assist the commission. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you very much for having me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS BROWN:  I think I have waited a long time for this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well now you have got the opportunity. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think because the scope for today 
is limited you probably are going to get another opportunity 
in regard to other work streams soon. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  I suppose Ms 
Brown would be ready to take the … 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja 
please 
administer 
the 
oath 
or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS BROWN:  My name is Lynette Brown. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS BROWN:  No. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 5 of 331 
 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MS BROWN:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson 
we using for Ms Lynne Brown Eskom Bundle 19 and the 
affidavits of Ms Lynne Brown are contained in Exhibit U40.  
Ms Lynne Brown please confirm with me that you have 
Exhibit – Eskom Bundle 19 with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will look at the spine of the file to 
10 
see whether it is Eskom Bundle 19. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja she is following the electronic 
bundle Chair. 
MS BROWN:  I am – I do not have Eskom Bundle – let me 
see.  I have Eskom Bundle 1, Eskom Supplementary Zola 
Tsotsi, I have 13, 12, 6.  I have 9, 17 and 14.  I do have 
copies of my sworn affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be better if you have exactly 
what the evidence leader and I have it will make it easy 
20 
when you are referred to pages.  Do you know whether you  
Have got this bundle somewhere in your house or you … 
MS BROWN:  No, no I have it all on – online. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS BROWN:  But I – I do not have – we received the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 6 of 331 
 
bundles quite late last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MS BROWN:  So I – I do not have Bundle 19.  I have 14, 
17 as I told you all the numbers Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Mr Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  Ms Brown I am 
being shown the link that was sent to you by email.  The – 
is that the link you are using to access the bundles? 
MS BROWN:  That is absolutely the link that I am using. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes in that link I see that there is the 
10 
Eskom Bundle 19 – ja.  Tell me the email that you are 
using to access the link. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka maybe I should 
adjourn while you sort out. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The issue of the bundles. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am going to adjourn for a short time to 
enable this to be sorted out. 
MS BROWN:  I have it.  Sorry Chair.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unless you say you have just found it I 
would like to adjourn to give everybody a chance to sort it 
out.  You are not saying you have just found it? 
MS BROWN:  Thank you.  No I have it – I have not just 
found it. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 7 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Let – let us adjourn for a 
few minutes.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Has the issue been sorted out? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It has been sorted out Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Ms Brown then I can refer 
to Bundle 19 again page 4.  Eskom Bundle 19. 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 4.  Are you on page 4? 
10 
MS BROWN:  The removal of Mr Natana Rajesh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you tell her about black numbers? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Pagination. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes we did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay look at the top black – top corner 
left black numbers on that bundle look at where it says 
Eskom-10-19-004.  When he says page 4 that is the page 
he is referring. 
20 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is just not mentioning 00.  Have you 
found it? 
MS BROWN:  Okay thank you.  I have Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 8 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She was there.  Chairperson as we do 
that let me just explain Ms Brown has submitted to the 
commission three affidavits.  Two of those affidavits were 
requested from her by a different work stream. The first 
one and the last one. 
 
The first affidavit does not deal with Eskom matters 
but we will make it available to the Chairperson.  We did 
ask for it and in view of the fact that it did not deal with 
Eskom matters we approached Ms – Ms Brown to do an 
affidavit in relation to Eskom matters and that affidavit is 
10 
this supplementary affidavit which is being referred to as 
the first supplementary affidavit.   
 
The last affidavit which is the third is the second 
supplementary affidavit and we will place both the two 
supplementary affidavits on record for purposes of Eskom 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. The reason why I 
was enquiring about it was  
1. I know it exists. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And 
2. In this supplementary affidavit she makes references 
to it I think. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it seems that it might be necessary to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 9 of 331 
 
have a look. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At what she says in that affidavit insofar 
as it – she refers to it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think there are places where she says 
something like as I said in my main affidavit or something 
like that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that – that is why I wanted to have a 
10 
look. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it can be made available as soon as 
you are able to make it available for me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously … 
MS BROWN:  Chair could I just say something about that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  I have submitted a – in January 2020 an 
affidavit and that is my – the affidavit that I refer to all the 
20 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes I think that is the one that I am 
talking about.  I think in this supplementary affidavit there 
are places where you make reference to it.  But they – they 
will make it available to me. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 10 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  Yes.  You are absolutely right there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  They will make it available to me 
hopefully within the next hour so we can continue.  Okay 
alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  MS Brown let us go back to 
page 4 where you found – you find that supplementary 
affidavit. 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You are there? 
MS BROWN:  I am – I am Advocate Seleka. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  That affidavit runs up to 
page 18 – page 18.   
MS BROWN:  On mine it says 355. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  No that is the entire bundle.  But 
if you go to page 18  
MS BROWN:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You will – you will get to the end of 
your supplementary affidavit. 
MS BROWN:  It actually takes me when I go to page 18 it 
takes me to Governance Challenges facing South African 
20 
Airways. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you still using the black numbers as 
opposed to the red numbers to have regard to ... 
MS BROWN:  I am using whatever Advocate Seleka tells 
me Mr Chairperson. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 11 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he… 
MS BROWN:  When he says ... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well when he said page 18 he is referring 
to the black numbers at the top left hand corner of the 
page.  He is not… 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not referring to 018 he says 18 and 
leaves out the 0.   
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On – on that page there is the signature 
10 
of the Commissioner of Oaths before whom you deposed to 
this affidavit.  That is before the annexures.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think I should… 
MS BROWN:  Yes.  I am there and that is because I have 
just scrolled down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you found the page? 
MS BROWN:  I have found the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  What do you see on that page Ms 
Brown? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you see the words Declaration at 
Stellenbosch on this the 19 t h August 2020 and then the 
signature of Commissioner of Oaths and the SAPS stamp? 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 12 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and do you see on the previous 
page namely page 17 at the bottom a signature before the 
word or above the word Deponent? 
MS BROWN:  Yes that is my signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is your signature.  And is this your 
affidavit and do you confirm the contents thereof as true 
and correct to the best of your knowledge and belief? 
MS BROWN:  To the best of my knowledge and belief I 
believe it is true and correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson I will – I beg 
leave to have this affidavit which is dated 19 August 2020 
admitted as Exhibit U40.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  40 or 14? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  40. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  40.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Ms Lynette Brown that 
starts at page 4 will together with its annexures be 
20 
admitted as an exhibit and will be marked as Exhibit U40.1. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Brown then to the  
second supplementary affidavit which you find on page 73.   
MS BROWN:  The second supplementary affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 13 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  On page 73.   
MS BROWN:  I have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it goes up to page 106 is that 
right?  Go to page 106 Ms Brown.   
MS BROWN:  Yes I have that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you – can you see the signature of 
the Commissioner of Oaths there? 
MS BROWN:  I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then if you go to the previous page 
10 
namely page 105 at the bottom there is the Deponent and 
there is a signature above the word Deponent.  Can you 
see that signature? 
MS BROWN:  I see the signature.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that your signature? 
MS BROWN:  That is my signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this your affidavit and are the contents 
thereof to the best of your knowledge and belief true and 
correct 
MS BROWN:  They are Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chairperson then I 
beg leave to have the – Ms Brown’s second supplementary 
affidavit dated 17 September 2020 admitted as Exhibit 
U40.2. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 14 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit – the second supplementary 
affidavit of Ms Lynette Brown which starts at page 73 will 
together with its annexures be admitted as an exhibit and 
will be marked as Exhibit U40.2. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Brown.  Sorry.  M 
Brown then we can lead your evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like she is still occupied with 
something.  Are you ready to start Ms Brown? 
MS BROWN:  I am ready Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
10 
MS BROWN:  I am ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
ADV LUSENGA:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Just a moment on the first supplementary 
affidavit Ms Brown wanted to effect a correction to 
paragraph 
78 
is 
it 
the 
appropriate 
time 
to 
do 
the 
correction? 
CHAIRPERSON:  On second sup… 
20 
ADV LUSENGA:  On the first supplementary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the first. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV LUSENGA:  00:12:38 thereof I make sure in terms … 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 15 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is long term  
ADV LUSENGA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are aware of it Mr Seleka that the 
correction that is intended. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes I think she – she did indicate she 
wishes to make the correction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think it is the opportune moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is the right time.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Brown. 
MS BROWN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What correction would you like to make 
in your… 
MS BROWN:  The correction is – the correction is Sections 
– paragraph 78 and it says: “The War Room”  in essence it 
is a Wednesday and it should say Cabinet.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  So that is on.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you sure about it Ms Brown because 
20 
it will read you had just – you had attended another 
frustrating cabinet meeting.   
MS BROWN:  I am writing funny stories but I – I think it 
was frustrating because it was about Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the truth.  Okay alright. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 16 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  Yes it is the absolute truth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Is it… 
MS BROWN:  Cabinet is on a Wednesday that I know 
absolutely for sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BROWN:  It is never not on a Wednesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Actually I seem to think that the 
acting DG may have raised something about… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They had to say it could not have been a 
10 
War Room meeting because it was a Wednesday of 
something like that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  She did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Was that the only correction 
Ms Brown you wanted to make? 
MS BROWN:  That – as far as I can see Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is alright.  I will ask that 
your legal team just prepares a short supplementary 
affidavit so that we can have a supplementary affidavit in 
the bundle to that corrects that so that one never says you 
20 
said War Room when you corrected it to say Cabinet.  
Okay alright. 
ADV LUSENGA:  We shall do so Chair. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 17 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Ms Brown I have explained Chair 
to Ms Brown that she is called today specifically in respect 
of the Eskom work stream related matters.  And those 
matters exclude therefore matters relating to other work 
streams 
which 
are 
the 
focus 
of 
this 
commission’s 
investigations. 
 
She will then in due course be called to lead 
evidence on those matters.  For present purposes the 
10 
matters relating to Eskom as I explained to Ms Brown we 
will start with her appointment as a Minister. 
 
The appointment of the Eskom board in December 
2014.  The subsequent appointment or composition of the 
sub-committees and what Mr Tsotsi has testified about 
before the commission. 
 
We will ask Ms Brown to touch on whether or not 
she had any dealings or relations with the Gupta brothers 
and or Mr Salim Essa. 
 
We will deal with the suspensions of the executives 
20 
in light of the meeting she had with the board of Eskom on 
the 11 t h March 2015. 
 
The inquiry in relation to that which was conducted 
by Dentons because the report was presented to her and 
the findings that were made in regard to that. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 18 of 331 
 
 
She will touch on the secondment of both Mr Molefe 
and Mr Brown – Mr Singh from Transnet to Eskom.  Deal 
with the removal of Mr Tsotsi and the removal of Mr 
Norman Baloyi. 
 
Those will be the issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  Ms Brown I see that the 
electronic bundle is two pages out so maybe that is why 
10 
you were struggling.  So when I refer you to a page number 
just add two more numbers you get the right page. 
MS BROWN:  (Inaudible). 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So Ms Brown just as by way of a 
background could you tell the Chairperson when you 
became 
the 
Minister 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Public 
Enterprises? 
MS BROWN:  I became the Minister of the Department of 
Public Enterprises in May I think the 26 t h of May 2014. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now who was the President at the 
20 
time? 
MS BROWN:  The President was Jacob Zuma. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  This was your first time to head 
– to head this department? 
MS BROWN:  Well Chair it was my first time in National 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 19 of 331 
 
politics and heading the National Department but I – since 
1994 
I 
held 
various 
positions 
in 
the 
Western 
Cape 
Provincial Legislature.  I was Speaker, Deputy Speaker.  I 
was MEC for Finance and Economic Development.  I was 
Chairperson of various Portfolio Committees and I even 
served as a stint as a Premier.   
 
I am a teacher by profession.  I have also joined the 
ANC in 1993 I joined the ANC and then – and Umkhonto we 
Sizwe.  I was a – and this I came to via my church youth 
movement so I was not new to politics.  I was not new to 
10 
public service when I became a Minister in December 2014.  
I was new to National politics.  If that was the question 
Advocate Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes no that is fine that answers it.  And 
are you still in National politics? 
MS BROWN:  No.  When I was removed as Minister of 
Public Enterprises I also resigned from the National 
Assembly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  When you became tired. 
MS BROWN:  I think it might be – no I did not become 
20 
tired. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh. 
MS BROWN:  It did take its toll on my family and my 
friends. You know that attacks were no longer on me.  I 
joined politics and I was the person who could take the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 20 of 331 
 
attacks.  But when they started going to my family and my 
friends and I use the word they quite widely because at 
this stage I do not want to say it is this or that.  I – I 
stepped down and anyway I am of age to step down now.  I 
am 60.  I am retirement age.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm.  You – do you think you are free to 
tell the Chairperson what the attacks were about? 
MS BROWN:  Well the attacks in essence were I think 
somebody in – I think it was Mr Molefe who said that the 
biggest or let me rather put in my view of it. 
10 
 
I think the attacks were driven by a campaign that 
the Chairperson now has to make a decision on is whether 
I captured – I was part of capturing the state.  And 
capturing the state in this case was about whether I was 
part of capturing the state via an entrance with the 
Gupta’s, the President and all of that. 
 
But that was not the worst part of the attacks.  I 
think the attacks came to where it actually dealt with 
personal matters and it dealt with people who had nothing 
to do with my work.  Family, friends but also to say you 
20 
know if I were to read everything I read in the newspapers 
I would not be surprised if any of you thought that I must 
live in a palace with a couple of sports cars in my 
basement.  A house built for me by the Gupta’s.  No Chair 
a whole lot of Gucci whatevers I live in my own house I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 21 of 331 
 
bought 28 years ago.  I paid it off when I retired even – in 
essence.  And I drive the same car I have driven before. 
 
So I think it was – they were all quite un-litigated 
attacks and I decided I was – I left – and I then left 
politics. 
 
At the time of course my father was also very ill and 
it played a big role in me not staying in – in politics. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well… 
MS BROWN:  Informal politics.  I am not – that is formal 
politics I am actually a member of the African National 
10 
Congress.  I believe in fighting for a non-racial, non-sexist, 
prosperous South Africa for all people. 
 
And I suppose I will always do that and I go to my 
branch or I will go to my branch.  I have been waiting for 
this occasion to come to the commission so that I can – I 
hope I will be able to clear myself and that this process 
would help to – help to set my reputation straight again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
MS BROWN:  I have worked for 20 odd years in – in 
provincial governments and I have always been viewed as 
20 
a corruption buster, a stabiliser of the organisation.  In my 
time 29 out of the 30 municipalities did not receive a single 
poor audit.  One did 29 did not.   
So this is a very important occasion for me and it is 
a very important occasion for me to be able to clear my 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 22 of 331 
 
name. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  And I am very grateful to you Chair.  In fact I 
have always been a supporter of this commission because I 
really believe that it will separate fact from fiction.  I also 
believe that it will separate the narrative from a reality. 
 
I – I supported it especially when the Public 
Protector sent me her questions on a Thursday.  I was on 
my first ever and only ever international trip with the 
former President Jacob Zuma to Kenya and I was to sign 
10 
with Transnet and I received her questions on the Thursday 
and by the time I arrived back home on the Monday the 
Public Protector had to leave office on the Wednesday. And 
even though I gave my responses it was never incorporated 
into her report.  It could not have been because she had 
left office at that time.  It – her time has expired.   
 
So yes Chair I am – I am – I make myself publicly 
accountable to this commission today and I thank you for 
the opportunity.  I might sound a bit like you at the moment 
my voice is a bit croaky but it is because I have a bit of flu. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  No, no that is fine.  You 
definitely should use this opportunity to deal with all 
relevant matters and make sure that you have put your side 
of the story properly because that is important. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you very much Chair. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 23 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know what you plan to do – how 
you plan to start but it seems to me looking at Ms Brown’s 
supplementary affidavit that it might be appropriate to give 
her an opportunity to talk about what the state of Eskom 
was when she was appointed and so and so forth. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Have 
before 
one 
goes 
to 
specific 
questions. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you like to talk about that Ms 
Brown?  How you found… 
MS BROWN:  I am – I am delight – I am delighted to be 
able to do so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay just do that. 
MS BROWN:  So I know this is a work stream that only 
relates to Eskom. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  But at the time when I became the Minister 
of Public Enterprises in May 2014 it was already six years 
before that where Eskom is not able to keep the lights on.  
And the way Eskom kept the lights on in all this period was 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 24 of 331 
 
to use what was called OCGT – Open Gas Turbines and we 
have two in Ankerlig and one in Mossel Bay.  So that is the 
purchasing of diesel and purchasing of diesel and my 
figure might be a bit out and it [word cut out] ... a billion 
rand.  So Eskom was no longer a growing concern and it 
does not matter how many documents are written up, 
Eskom was not a growing concern.  There were a whole 
range of reasons for it.  One of the reasons was the fact 
that it was spending so much money on trying to keep the 
lights on by purchasing diesel.  
10 
 
The 
second 
problem 
with 
Eskom, 
at 
that 
particular time, was the fact that it, therefore, did no 
maintenance and all of the plants, all of Eskom’s plants are 
older than, if my memory serves me well..  Remember 
Chair, it was seven years ago.  All of the plants were 25-
years and older.   
 
And some of those plants were in my period, 
their lives were extended by ten more years.  Eskom had a 
huge debt.  In my time – when I came to Eskom the debt 
was at R 180 billion.  By the time I was reshuffled out of 
20 
Cabinet, 
the 
time 
– 
Eskom’s 
– 
the 
debt 
was 
at 
R 260 billion.  I think I looked at it about a month ago.  The 
debt is at R 450 billion.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Eskom has a huge, huge debt. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 25 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   So that is on the one hand.  So on an 
operational level, the company – the December of that 
year, both the CE and the chair called me around 
December to say that by January the 15 t h we will not have 
any money to pay the 42 000 plus workers that worked for 
Eskom.   
 
So Eskom was in a really, really – in real dire 
straits including the fact that by the time I got there, the 
then board was in a very, very highly conflicted state and 
10 
that was to do with the fact that there was a tender for 
Koeberg.  That happened three years before my time but it 
came to an end within my time.   
 
They sort of made the agreement or made the 
deal within my – they concluded the deal within my time.  
And that was the Western House Ariva Project.  And this 
was also quite – in fact, it was my first run in with the 
media in a very negative way because that – for some 
reason Mr Montana was DG at the time, asked me to look 
at the process of that tender.   
20 
 
Now I have never done it, again, before even 
though there were big tenders but the view was that I was 
the person who changed the name of the – whoever got the 
tender but the courts ruled on that matter.  And many 
months later, the courts ruled on the matter and the matter 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 26 of 331 
 
was, largely, clarified.  But it was – the company was a 
very conflicted company.   
 
I also want to just make two last points about 
Eskom.  The company is incredible large.  It is a key-
national point.  Eskom also employs about 42 000 workers 
across the country.  If – and it is absolutely crucial to the 
economy.  If Eskom does not work, the economy will not 
work.   
 
So Eskom is absolutely crucial to the economy, 
on the one side.  On the other hand, Eskom was doing a 
10 
fabulous job.  We are now – in 1994, I think 52 0000 
people had access to electricity and I am sure now it is 
even more. 
 
But by the time I left, it was about 90% of the 
public that had access to electricity and therefore access 
to lights and warmth and being able to put your food in the 
fridge and just on a very ordinary level and therefore the 
company accepts and affects everyone’s life.   
 
I think I will stop there, Chair, but it is – I think 
the point I am making is, that Eskom was in dire financial 
20 
straits, it was in dire straits in terms of load-shedding.  I 
mean, I think I was called the Minister of Load-shedding.  
Even though I had other portfolios in my portfolio, I was 
called the Minister of Load-shedding. 
 
It is nothing compared to what is happening at 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 27 of 331 
 
the moment.  Nobody is blamed at the moment for any of 
this load-shedding and I just want you to reflect on that 
even if it is not now.   
 
Not even Eskom is blamed for the load-shedding 
at the moment.  The public sentiment against the company 
was very, very high and that was just when I came into the 
company.  So nothing happened yet.  I just came into the 
company and there was that public sentiment.  So I want to 
leave it at that for now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Seleka. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, thank you Chair.  Ms Brown, could 
you please give us the date when you were removed as the 
Minister. 
MS BROWN:   I must give you the date when I was 
removed as the Minister? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I think it was in 2017 in February.  I cannot 
remember the exact date. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not 2018? 
MS BROWN:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not when Cyril Ramaphosa 
became President? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 28 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   Yes, 2018.  Sorry, 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   February 2018.  Yes. 
MS BROWN:   Was it 2018?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, 
he 
became 
President 
in 
February 2018. 
MS BROWN:   Yes.  I just need to add Chair.  You know, 
things were so bad in Eskom that a War Room was created.  
And this War Room was created on the – I think it was the 
10 t h of December 2014.  It was the last Cabinet meeting 
where 
all 
the 
kind 
of 
companies 
– 
not 
companies, 
10 
departments had affected Eskom, were all part of it and it 
was chaired by the Deputy President at that time, the 
President today.  So I am trying to show you the amount of 
absolute ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Pressure. 
MS BROWN:   ...chaos that was in the company and 
pressure that we were under in that company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Well, Mr Seleka ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   But equally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 
MS BROWN:   If you have a tender in that company you are 
a millionaire or billionaire overnight.  So there is a lot of 
battle around that too. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Are you going to have questions to 
her in relation to how she found the Eskom or are you 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 29 of 331 
 
going to go into other issues because if you are going to 
other issues, I want to ask her about how she found 
Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, I have a version from one of 
the executives on this aspect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So I can put that version to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Maybe, let me start ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...by raising a few questions.  Do you 
10 
know, Ms Brown, one of the issues that the Commission is 
looking at is whether bodies and functionaries which were 
supposed to perform oversight over SOE’s and government 
departments and hold relevant people accountable if things 
did not go right, particularly, if there were allegations of 
corruption and so on, whether they did their job and 
whether they performed their oversight properly. 
 
Now oversight might not – the term oversight 
might not be seen as accurate, maybe, in relation to the 
role of some of the people but basically everyone who was 
20 
supposed to concern themselves about whether a certain 
entity, SOE was working properly or department and so on. 
 
Simply because, it may well be that where 
oversight 
bodies 
and 
other 
functionaries 
who 
were 
supposed to perform oversight or supervise, keep an eye 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 30 of 331 
 
on how things are going in ex-government department or in 
an SOE, where they do not do their job properly or where 
they are weak, maybe that creates an environment where 
corruption can happen easily. 
 
Now one of my concerns in regard to SOE’s is 
that there are a number of SOE’s where there are a lot of 
allegations of corruption and those allegations have been 
there for a long time which seem to either on the way to 
collapsing or some of which seemed to have collapsed. 
 
And one wonders whether part of the reason why 
10 
that is happening is because people who are supposed to 
perform oversight functions over them, have not done their 
job properly over a certain period because they are 
supposed to have picked up weaknesses or certain issues 
quite early and put in place measure to address the 
situation and not get the entities to a point where they are 
almost collapsing. 
 
So you said in your evidence about how you 
found Eskom, for example, that when you came in, the debt 
was about, I think, hundred billion rands but then later on 
20 
it was two hundred billion and I think you said now it is 
around four hundred billion which seems to suggest to me 
it is not getting better.  It is getting worse. 
 
So the question that arises to me is.  But the 
problems at Eskom, talk about load-shedding.  I think the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 31 of 331 
 
first load-shedding, if I can remember, happened in 2008.  
I do not know if it might have happened earlier.  I cannot 
remember.  But I remember 2008 quite well and then I 
remember 2015.  You know, obviously we have it now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   2010, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 2020.  So, but the question is.  The 
people, and in this case maybe one should say the 
executive, you know and maybe the boards as well.  Are 
they not capable of not identifying what the problem is 
about load-shedding?   
10 
 
If they are not capable of doing that, can they 
not find people with the right expertise and experience 
anywhere in the world who will know how to solve this 
problem?  And then solve the problem.   
 
It just seems to me almost inexcusable to say 
you can have the same problem that affects businesses 
and the lives of people in such a drastic way for about 12-
years.  It is going on and there seems to be no light at the 
end of the tunnel. 
 
Because if I do not know how to identify the 
20 
problem, at least I must recognise it and to say:  Look, I do 
not have the expertise to identify the problem.  Let us look 
for somebody who can identify the problem and identify 
what needs to be done to solve it. 
 
So I am asking this at a level that I look at the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 32 of 331 
 
issue of oversight.  Maybe this might show that oversight – 
performance of oversight has been extremely poor or it is 
dysfunctional and it then makes it easy for corruption to 
happen as well because those who pursue corruption 
realise that people who are supposed to perform oversight, 
are sleeping.   
 
I may be harsh in terms of what I am saying but 
these are ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   No ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...these are real problems and we must 
10 
not shy away from saying it the way it is if we are to solve 
the problems.  So what would you say about that? 
MS BROWN:   Well, Chair, you know make an incredible...  
It is an incredibly important comment that you make, 
because in essence, what it says, that in my time, I could 
not get rid of corruption and people before my time, they 
could not get rid of corruption. 
 
But you must remember – there are a couple of 
things that I want to raise.  And I think the answer, at the 
end of it, is actually nothing to do with the companies.  It 
20 
is to do with the model.   
 
So let me explain oversight and say in my 
department 
or 
that 
department 
I 
headed, 
TPE(?).  
Personally, 
I 
do 
not 
do 
oversights 
as 
an 
executive 
authority.  Oversight is done via all of the DG on Energy 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 33 of 331 
 
and her or his department.   
 
Aviation 
has 
a 
department, 
Legal 
and 
Governance has a department and so forth.  So everyone 
has an oversight responsibility but you only get the 
documents, the annual statements, for example, or the 
quarterly statements two months after the statements have 
been drawn up because they have to interrogate those 
statements and then they bring the issues to you and the 
issues are never issues of corruption or any of that. 
 
In fact, in my time, I got so frustrated within the 
10 
second year that I started engaging the SIU and the – in 
dealing with this matter for three of the big state-owned 
companies, Transnet, Denel and Eskom.   
 
And part of the problem was that we spent a very 
long, probably almost six months in negotiating the terms 
with the SIU because there is also a culture in all of these 
state-owned companies.  For example, the Coal Plus Mines 
were never – they never went out to tender for example. 
 
The 
fact 
that 
procurement 
is 
completely 
decentralised.  So even the person who is purchasing the 
20 
milk at a small station could not purchase enough milk for 
him or her household.  So the levels of corruption, I think, 
have been ongoing for many, many years. 
 
But I want to pose.  So I think it has to do with 
the fact, for me, that we have a system that is largely 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 34 of 331 
 
governed by the – by the Companies Law and out of the 
Companies Law we develop what is called the MOI which is 
the Memorandum of...  I cannot remember what it means. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Incorporation. 
MS BROWN:   ...but is about...  Incorporation.  And it is...  
Then we have a whole number, shareholders compact that 
meet the shareholders compact.  And in preparation for 
this day, the first meeting I had with Eskom, they met 53% 
of the shareholders compact.  Now why we are not dealing 
with the 47%? 
10 
 
And part of the problem is that we do not have a 
step-in clause.  We have the leave the company to run 
itself, have oversight over the company in terms of its 
overall results where the PFMA does not make provisions 
for you to stop a tender.  The PFMA says that the National 
Treasury should write out – it should – and I use the word 
blacklist.  I cannot stand the word blacklist.  Why are there 
no white list?   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MS BROWN:   But anyway.  They blacklist companies that 
20 
you are not supposed to do business with and this is 
supposed to come out annually.  Now I know this because I 
was a Finance MEC.   
 
So my own view is that the company – and I 
have seen this in other countries as well and I have gone 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 35 of 331 
 
on two or three trips with – the vehicle that these company 
can run in.  These companies – some vehicle where the 
companies will be able to deal with aviation, deal without it 
being attached to governments but it still remains state-
owned companies and that we called the SOC Reform 
Process or the South African... ja, State-owned Company 
Reform Process. 
 
So in a way, what I am saying is.  There is also a 
culture within all these organisations and plus you can tick 
off all the check boxes.  There is an Internal Audit, for 
10 
example.  Then there is also an External Audit.  So the 
internal auditors are audited by external auditors.  So it is 
a very complex governance structure that I think lends 
itself to any of it – any of these problems.   
 
What do we do?  We...  When I had a problem 
and nobody in Eskom could tell me how we solve load-
shedding and the financial crisis...  And what I did was, we 
got – I then told the – and I had to say this is an informal 
meeting that I am calling and I very like to have you 
interrogate what the problem is and how we solve the 
20 
problem.   
 
And I think that August 2016, we had no more 
load-shedding.  I think to 2015, August 2015 we had no 
more load-shedding and that was a combination of the 
skills that we brought in as well as the fact that we had an 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 36 of 331 
 
investigation and that investigation set out and I believe it 
was about 18 areas that Eskom had to follow and I am 
using Eskom only as an example.  Eskom had to follow and 
those had to be... 
 
And it is a combination of that that gave us a 
break in load-shedding for the next three years afterwards.  
So Chair, I have gone roundabout it to explain to you this.  
The issue is the oversight is practise but it is practice 
through 
a 
department 
that 
has 
to 
interrogate 
the 
documentation that Eskom brings.  
10 
 
So I am not sure what you – what else you want 
to interrogate but if there was anything else you had to 
interrogate, then that you hand over to a – to the relevant 
authorities whether it is the SIU or the NPA or so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you see ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   But we have no stepping clause.  We have 
no stepping clause in that – in actually getting into the 
operational issues of Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Well, I would imagine that to 
the extent that you say you did not have any oversight 
20 
function to perform but your officials, the DG or certain 
DDG’s were the ones who were doing that.   
 
I would imagine that it would, nevertheless, have 
been your responsibility to assess whether they were doing 
that – performing that function effectively because where I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 37 of 331 
 
come from, Ms Brown, is that if you can have a problem, 
and load-shedding is an example, that was known in 2008 
and it happened in 2008.   
 
I do not know whether it was only in 2008 or 
went into 2009 but it happened in 2008.  And then it 
happened in 2015.  I hope I am right about 2015.  I know it 
happened somewhere there and then there was a time that 
...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   I think not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  There was a time where it stopped 
10 
and I think we may have been told as the nation, at some 
stage, that the load-shedding problem had been solved.  It 
would never happen again.  I think we may have been told 
that at some stage and it is back. 
 
So I am simply saying.  Either there is no prober 
and effective oversight or if there is proper and effective 
oversight, which identifies what the problems are, then 
maybe somebody who is supposed to make sure that a 
solution is found maybe those are not doing their jobs 
properly because it is 12-years since 2018(sic) (2008), 
20 
maybe 13-years.   
 
And if, as we sit here now, we say we do not see 
the end in sight of load-shedding.  Unless we change how 
things are done, we will have load-shedding in the next...  
Ten years from now we will still be complaining about load-
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 38 of 331 
 
shedding.   
 
Something somewhere needs to change and one 
of it might be looking at everybody who is doing  - who is 
supposed to do something about it, is effective, knows 
what they are doing or whether somebody else should be 
brought in who might have better expertise and experience 
to say the correct solution is this one and not that one. 
 
Because, otherwise, as things stand it is like ten 
years from now we might still be having the same problem, 
and it does not seem to me – it does not say to anybody 
10 
who is looking at this, we know what the solution is.  It is 
like we do not know but if we do not know, I would imagine, 
there must be somebody in the whole world who has the 
right knowledge, the right experience, who can say no, this 
is the way it should be solved in the context of South 
Africa. 
MS BROWN:   Chair, you know, our countries have found 
solution and in many other countries they have what is a 
called a reformed state owned company structure and some 
of them have it within – so they are run as commercial 
20 
businesses 
and 
the 
commercial 
business 
becomes 
a 
catalyst for the growing the economy and I still think that it 
is because it is placed within a department – in a 
department.  I did not say that I did not have oversight 
over – I would not have called in the SIU if I did not have 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 39 of 331 
 
oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I must have  - I must have not 
…[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   The problem is, the documentation that you 
get from the department that actually does the actual work, 
it is very late and so it is always – it is a structural 
problem but I also want to make a point, when – in my time 
we stopped load shedding from – without using OCGTs, 
that is diesel.  We stopped load shedding completely and I 
did not stop it but Mr Molefe and his team of people 
10 
stopped load shedding completely and they said to the 
then President that there will not be load shedding again.  
Now there was not load shedding for a while and we have 
load shedding now again and, you know, Chair, if I were to 
say to you that this only about Eskom I would be lying to 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
No, 
you 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
MS BROWN:   I think it is a whole range of issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MS BROWN:   I think it is a whole range of issues, it has 
got to do with who purchases coal, the price of coal, why 
some people get more for coal than other people.  Ag, it is 
a whole range of all of those things.  And so, you see, if 
somebody says it is R150 per ton of coal, so – and let me 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 40 of 331 
 
make one other point and this is my last point on this.  
Chair, the other issue is, you know, all of these 
large companies that provide Eskom with coal, remember 
they do not want to be affected by any small people coming 
in, so they then get in all the well-known black leaders to 
be a director in this company and in that company and 
eventually you see them in Save South Africa, so it is a 
very complex thing.  I think what we must do for state 
owned companies is to take it outside of government.  I am 
not saying they must be privatised – remember there are 
10 
720 state owned companies in this country and those we 
do not see and we do not feel and it does not affect our 
lives, we do not know they exist.  So some of them must be 
closed down.  Some of them must be merged – there are 
lots cultural organisations, they can be merged into one or 
a few other – we decide what are the strategic ones that 
we want to grow and to help us grow the economy and that 
will place in a vehicle like they have done in Singapore, 
like they have done in China, they have done it around the 
oil in Norway and they have done it in the United States, 
20 
they have done it across the country because they realise 
that it is not going to work operating within government.  It 
reports – its greatest shareholder is government but there 
is public participation, there is participation from capital, 
you know, but it is structured as a company and it operates 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 41 of 331 
 
as a company.  It is not accountable to some politician 
somewhere, it is actually accountable to a board that will 
be getting dividends if and when this company – including 
the state getting dividends when this company succeeds.   
So for me, I think it is the wrong space for a state 
owned company to – and that, Chair, is the last point I 
make on this.   I will – I think it will be a wonderful doctoral 
thesis for somebody to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I will let Mr Seleka continue but 
you said it is not just as common, I agreed.  You go to 
10 
SAA, SAA, I do not know where it is with regard to 
liquidation process, the rescue process right now but for 
all intents and purposes it has collapsed and you ask 
yourself the question, within the context of my question on 
oversight, you ask yourself the question but did somebody 
not pick up the problems earlier and identified what needed 
to be done in order to avoid SAA reaching the point that it 
has 
reached? 
 
Now 
I 
have 
heard 
evidence 
in 
the 
Commission of a lot of problems that happened at SAA a 
number of years back and – so you ask yourself the 
20 
question, but there were the problems, some of them were 
in the media, did somebody not take a view to say here is 
what needs to be done in order to avoid SAA collapsing?  
Denel, same thing is happening.   
So where are the people who are supposed to look 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 42 of 331 
 
properly after these assets of the people of South Africa?  
And when these assets of the people of South Africa have 
got problems, where are the people who are supposed to 
pick up the problems?  If they do not know what the 
solutions is, look for people who can find the solutions and 
take measures to make sure that these assets of the 
people of South Africa do not end up where SAA and Denel 
are at the moment.  You have SABC also with its own 
problems.  It is as if there is no commitment or there is no 
will to do the right thing to make sure that these things – 
10 
these disastrous consequences do not happen. 
So - but I come to this discussion within the context 
of saying when there is no proper oversight, it may well be 
that that is one of the things that fertilizes the environment 
for corruption to happen.   
Therefore, if I am going to make recommendations 
about what measures need to be adopted to try and bring 
the levels of corruption in this country down, I must look at 
that as well, I must ask myself the question how does it 
happen that entities such as the ones I have mentioned 
20 
deteriorate over a long period and the deterioration is not 
arrested, it just goes on and on and on until in the case of 
some of the entities they have either collapsed or are on 
the brink of collapsing. 
So you might not wish to say anything further but I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 43 of 331 
 
am just contextualising what my concerns about oversight 
are about.  Okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Ms 
Brown, 
just 
taking 
the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see that we have gone past the tea but 
maybe you can continue, at quarter to twelve we can take 
a tea break. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Brown to take 
the point further particularly in the context of Eskom and 
the war room that you have already mentioned, was not 
10 
that establishment of the war room, particularly in respect 
of Eskom – well, I know the other SOEs were also singled 
out, I think Denel and SABC, was that not a good example 
of pursuing an oversight role in terms of Eskom in this 
case because that war room was established, as you say, 
in December 2014.  That is about seven months after your 
appointment as the Minister of DPE and we have listened 
to evidence here that I think even from your own affidavit 
that you were part of the ministerial committee that was 
assigned to that war room.   
20 
The Deputy President, Mr Ramaphosa, was the 
Chairperson of that war room.  The war room requested 
information from Eskom, had meetings, so – but we know 
that after Mr Molefe was appointed, Dr Ngubane writes a 
letter to you and he says not only are we going to stop 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 44 of 331 
 
participating in the war room but we will not respond to 
requests by the war room and that gets to be allowed.  So 
his request is given, the request of the board.  Again, 
taking away government’s effort to do exactly what the 
Chairperson is saying, perform an oversight role.  Why was 
the war room terminated? 
MS BROWN:   I mean, that is a question you have to ask 
the President, the then President, because he is the only 
one who – I am the one who attend the war room but he 
was the one who has put the war room together. 
10 
 
But, you know, at the time there was a huge debate 
going on about whether IPPs were preferable to Eskom, 
then Eskom had to take the IPPs and it was not – and so 
that was actually the letter around Dr Ngubane because 
Eskom knew that they could not afford the IPPs, they were 
largely foreign business with I think about 10% South 
African owned and that became a big struggle because it 
was again on a take or pay basis which means that even if 
we do not need solar for the day we still had to pay for the 
solar and Eskom could not – Eskom could not afford that 
20 
and there was a lot of – I mean, look, Advocate Seleka, 
this is seven years ago, there was a lot of conflict around 
that but the issue was to be able to bring together water 
and sanitation, Public Enterprises, the Department of 
Energy, National Treasury and all the departments that 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 45 of 331 
 
impacted in some way or the other on Eskom but there 
remained a sort of policy decision that created a lot of 
fractiousness within that. 
 
When Dr Ngubane wrote the letter – I do not seem 
to remember the letter because I would have told him he 
should just go to the war room because the war room was 
established by the President at the time and we had to 
follow that direction.  I do not know if you have a letter 
from me to say that I would have just insisted that he 
attend the war room.  The fact that people give apologies 
10 
to the war room and not have alternatives would be 
another issue but the idea with the war room was to try and 
stem the load shedding. 
 
The problem with the war room was that it had – it 
was too large a structure that looked at the technical 
aspects without looking at the issues that we were facing 
at that time whether it was load shedding, no access to 
finances and so forth. 
 
Out of the war room a very positive thing did come 
and that was that we got a R23 billion bailout from 
20 
government but the company cannot operate on bailouts 
and then of course the bigger issue is that fewer people 
are purchasing electricity from Eskom, people are going off 
the grid, large, very large users of Eskom has also gone off 
the grid.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 46 of 331 
 
So I think I am understanding the conflict in my – if 
the Chairperson reads my recommendations in my first 
affidavit, I do do quite a number of things on oversight but 
I do not – I mean, unless you can show me to document 
where Dr Ngubane writes the letter. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no I …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   And maybe later I will be most – I will be 
happy to respond to it then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, can I do that before you take 
the adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just quickly because I have it open 
right in front of me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is in Eskom bundle 13, it is page 
445. 
MS BROWN:   13. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I read it to you, you will look out for it 
20 
during the tea adjournment as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is a letter dated 10 …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Let me read it to you, Ms Brown, it 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 47 of 331 
 
is a letter dated 10 September 2015, Eskom bundle 13, 
page 445.  So he writes: 
“Dear Minister Brown, Eskom’s participation in the 
war room.” 
The letter has one, two, three, four, five paragraphs, with 
6.1 being a one liner.  He ultimately reads – and we will do 
the whole letter when we come back.  The second last 
paragraph he says: 
“Accordingly, the board has resolved to suspend 
Eskom’s participation in the war room.  This will 
10 
mean that the Chief Executive will be requested not 
to respond to the requests for information and 
attendance 
at the meetings but focus 
on the 
management of Eskom and its turnaround.  This 
decision will be implemented forthwith.” 
And then he says: 
“I trust that the Minister will find this in order.” 
And we will come back to it after tea. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us take the tea adjournment, 
we will resume at 12 o’clock.  We adjourn. 
20 
MS BROWN:   Thank you. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC: Thank you Chairperson.  Ms Brown, did 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 48 of 331 
 
you in the meantime find that letter in Eskom bundle 13, 
one three.  Your sound is ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Sorry, I have not ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  You were on mute, yes.  
MS BROWN:  Ja, the issue that I, my recollection of that is 
and I was that by now they were starting to resolve the 
issue of load shedding, and I think somebody said they 
stopped going to the, I think it was Mr Molefe who said that 
they stopped going to the war room. 
 
Remember, the issue before Eskom was the fact that 
10 
there was incredible load shedding that was happening and 
I had a meeting with the President, Jacob Zuma a little bit 
before that, where it was told to me that we would be 
heading for a black out, and a black out if ... was if it 
happened that we had a black out, especially in the 
Gauteng area it would crash the economy completely. 
 
So at the time the board’s reckoning was that the 
load shedding was their biggest concern and they wanted to 
get on top of that problem, and I think that letter is written 
just after we had gotten to a point where there was no load 
20 
shedding any longer and they did not see the need to sit 
through those meetings and I had an engagement with Mr, 
with Dr Ben Ngubane and I insisted that they send people 
still to those war room meetings.  
 
But I must tell you that it was not the CE or the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 49 of 331 
 
acting CE or the acting financial director.  It was somebody 
else that went, I cannot remember who it was, but who went 
to the war room, but it is because they completed and they 
actually found a solution and the only big solution that they 
found was actually to do more maintenance.  
 
To do more maintenance they had to find the money 
for it and they felt that the war room was taking up too 
much of their time.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, now if you look at that letter Ms 
Brown, the third paragraphs, let me read the letter.  It says: 
10 
 
“The above matter has reference.  The board 
engaged with the acting chief executive and his 
executive management at a strategic break 
away over two days.  We examined a number of 
key strategies that the team has put together 
and encapsulated in a turnaround plan for 
Eskom which will soon be sent to the minister.  
The board has fully endorsed at this plan and 
supported execution.” 
 
This paragraph says: 
20 
 
“The turnaround plan focuses on key areas, 
namely liquidity, maintenance with minimal load 
shedding.” 
 
That is the part I want to emphasize.  Maintenance 
with minimal load shedding.  Which seems to suggest that 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 50 of 331 
 
there is load shedding but they want to minimize it and then 
they go on to mention other aspects.  When ...[intervenes]  
MS 
BROWN: 
 
In 
their 
rational 
at 
the 
time, 
sorry 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, proceed.  
MS BROWN:  I am very, very sorry to make a fish up of your 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, this is what I wanted to say.  Let me 
complete ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  The issue is ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Ms Brown.  Hang on Ms Brown.  
Let Mr Seleka finish. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let me complete that ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  I am very sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  When Mr Molefe was here, he also 
specifically said his main issue was load shedding and he 
did not want to go into the, to go to the meetings of the war 
room anymore so that he can concentrate on getting rid of 
load shedding.  
 
So he made the focus on load shedding as he 
20 
testified here, the reason why he wanted to stop attending 
meetings of the war room.  Well, I do not know whether you 
have insight into that, because if you do not know, maybe 
you should not venture an answer as to why they wrote you 
...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 51 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  No, I would like to venture an answer.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
MS BROWN:  Because I remember that you know, I 
remember the trauma of load shedding in this country too 
well.  By that time, by the time we set up the war room, we 
were at load shedding at stage 3.  Eskom then introduced 
3A and 3B because, which meant that we had no electricity 
three times a day for two hours at a time.  
 
Six hours out of the day which was just not good 
enough for business.  Especially businesses that did not, 
10 
high end and intensive business.  That is what I wanted to 
say.  So at the time, they did not want to go, come back to 
the war room because they wanted to minimize the load 
shedding, so that if anything we should be doing load 
shedding at stage 1, which is once a day. 
 
So I think and then systematically get to a point 
where we have no load shedding which by August 2015 we 
had no load shedding.  So that is my explanation but having 
said that, I insisted that one person still come to, one 
person with enough knowledge and it does not have to 
20 
necessarily be the CE or the acting CE at the time. 
 
That one person with enough knowledge still attends 
the war room so that there is feedback from the war room to 
Eskom.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Can you recall whether your 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 52 of 331 
 
response was communicated in writing?  That response to 
the effect that you still wanted one person to attend?   
MS BROWN:  You see Advocate Seleka, one of my problems 
is that I do not, I have never made decisions or I have 
rarely made decisions.  Let me say it that way, without a 
decision memo.  So if that letter came to me, there would 
have been a decision memo that accompanied that letter, 
because that letter would never come to me. 
 
A formal letter would never come to me without it 
going via the energy unit within the department, because it 
10 
will come to me with a solution which I might accept or 
reject, but having said that, I do not have, I do not have a 
proof.  
 
I do not have a copy of that memo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  The, ja.  I was just raising that 
with you in the context of the shareholder exercising an 
oversight and ensuring that the SOE’s operate at an optimal 
level, and I want to draw your attention again to the 
affidavit of Ms Tshelofelo Molefe which is the second 
supplementary affidavit, also in Eskom Bundle 13, page 
20 
686.  
 
She refers to an occasion there in her affidavit and I 
will read it out to you on page 688 and this relates to the 
war room.  In this affidavit, she says: 
 
“On 11 December 2014 cabinet announced a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 53 of 331 
 
government war room, with an implementation 
of a five point plan.  Eskom made its first 
presentation to the inter-ministerial committee 
on 28 February 2015.” 
 
She says she did not attend the meeting, she was 
not available, she had travelled for business.  That is the 
first presentation, 28 February 2015.  A second presentation 
to the IMC, which is the inter-ministerial committee, she 
says was made on 3 March 2015.   
 
The presentation was led by Mr Mathona and 
10 
herself.  Before that main meeting, Mr Mathona was 
requested to meet with the deputy president to take him 
through the Eskom challenges and presentation.  Mr 
Mathona was accompanied by myself, Mr Matshela Koko, Mr 
Den Marokane and two other Eskom executives.  
 
Then she says: 
 
“Ms Lynne Brown was not at this meeting.  She 
arrived a few minutes after the main meeting 
with the deputy president and some ministers 
had started, as we understood she had been 
20 
out of the country.” 
 
Paragraph 11 reads: 
 
“Mr Mathona and I tried for several weeks to 
have a meeting with minister Brown to take her 
through the Eskom presentation prior to the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 54 of 331 
 
meeting on 3 March 2015, but all to no avail.” 
 
Were you aware of this attempts by them to seek to 
have a meeting with you?  Go ahead.  
MS BROWN:  Can I respond? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, please.  
MS BROWN:  Well, I must say that the deputy president 
always kept me informed if I on the odd occasion left the 
country.  My recollection of that they presented on every 
Friday Eskom had to present, remember the meetings were 
about Eskom, and so the dates that she has there I am sure 
10 
it is absolutely true and that I could have been late for that 
meeting.  
 
Not because I did not attend, I attended every IMC 
meeting.  I remained in engagement with the deputy 
president.  I might have been late, because I have been 
abroad as she says.  I do not remember that I have been 
abroad then, but having said that, the structure is like this.  
 
It was an unusual, it was unusual for the CE and the 
chief executive to present to me, unless it was with the 
approval of the board Chair, because I spoke with the board 
20 
Chair.  The CE spoke with the DG and that happens to be 
the practice that comes out of the Company’s Act so that 
you do not have an interference of, a political interference 
in the operational side of what is happening.  
 
The SD never presented to me.  I heard yesterday 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 55 of 331 
 
Mr Singh said I spoke with him, but the SD never presented 
to me.  So I am not absolutely sure what she is talking 
about, wanting several meetings.  Mr Mathona had easy 
access to me.  
 
He spoke to me often and the reason, and my 
department, my legal and governance unit warned me about 
that.  Saying you should not be speaking to Mr Mathona.  
The Chair speaks to you.  The dilemma I had is that we 
were in a crisis.   
 
We were in a huge crisis.  We were not liquid, we 
10 
were not a going concern and we were having load shedding 
every day.  So ja, that is my response to that.  I do not for a 
moment disagree with her that she, I do disagree with her 
that she has attended all those meetings.  
 
I do disagree with her that she had a liquidity plan 
for the company.  I also stand by my statement in my 
affidavit, where I say that the country, the company was not 
a financially going concern.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  And it does not matter what the books say, we 
20 
at any time could not pay us this, or Eskom at any time 
could 
not 
pay 
the 
staff 
and 
that 
is 
what 
the 
CE 
communicated to me.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Well, that tells me you have read 
the rest of her affidavit.  I will come to that.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 56 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  I did? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, I will come to that point of liquidity 
but let me stay with this point for a moment.  The, you say 
you spoke in terms of protocol you would have spoken to 
the board Chair and the CE would have spoken to the DG.  
Now would that be the position in the context of the war 
room where there is this inter-ministerial committee that 
was established? 
 
The Chairperson of the war room is the deputy 
president.  They were able to have a meeting with the 
10 
deputy president, but they sought to have the same meeting 
in the context of the war room with you and they say they 
could not.  
 
Did that protocol apply that? 
MS BROWN:  I do not know, the protocol would not apply.  I 
mean it would apply in law, but in terms of the company’s 
law but it would not apply with me at that stage because we 
were in a crisis and for the life of me I cannot tell you at all 
why I did not give a meeting to them.   
 
You 
must 
remember, 
every 
other 
state 
of 
the 
20 
company who had difficulty, war in the face of Eskom, 
Eskom’s difficulty was just enormous.  So I am not aware of 
not wanting to give them a meeting.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Then of course on the 11 t h of 
March they were suspended but we will come to that at a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 57 of 331 
 
later stage.  
MS BROWN:  Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Can I, when I ask you this in so far as 
you have mentioned, sorry before I move on.  Does it not, if 
one looks at what the FD at the time, the person who was 
the FD at the time is saying in this affidavit, is it a fair 
observation that there seems not, they seemed not to have 
been an effort on your part to show commitment to a tool or 
mechanism in the form of the war room, that cabinet had put 
in place to play an aversive role over Eskom? 
10 
MS BROWN:  Not at all. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Not at all. 
MS BROWN:  I, as I said to you before, I saw the war room 
as a, after I had gotten past my emotional issues about 
being undermined and all of that, I completely supported the 
war room.  I worked timorously with the board room.  I 
ensured all the time that Eskom was present and they had 
their presentations.  
 
The issue was, and remember I also saw a set of 
minutes that Ms Molefe has [indistinct – 00:21:39].  You 
20 
must remember that those are action minutes.  All of the 
squabbles and the battles and all of that, will not reflect in 
those minutes.  
 
But it is, it was ... there was a real issue that I think 
it was March, it was first January the 15 t h that they could 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 58 of 331 
 
not find money and thus they phoned me in December and 
then by March the 15 t h we remained on high alert and I was 
hoping that we would find a solution within the war room. 
 
But remember, the war room also worked on broader 
issues and technical issues.  One of the big issues that the 
war room worked on was the issues relating to generation.  
Why the Medupe and Phasile had huge cost overruns and 
behind time in their building.  
 
But at the same time they were also looking at a 
broader 
energy 
proposals, 
and 
in 
my 
mind, 
I 
could 
10 
understand that Eskom had a very specific purpose and that 
was to keep the lights on, stop load shedding and to 
become liquid again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unless ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  So, so that might be ... that might have been 
the issue because we spoke about IPP’s in the war room.  
We spoke about our rejection and now non-rejection of 
nuclear.  We spoke about all forms of energy types.  The 
water usage at particular plants, we spoke about financing 
of the energy, energy options within the war room. 
20 
 
We spoke about the 23 billion rand bail out for 
Eskom.  So it is a, there were lots of issues that we spoke 
about.  Eskom had a specific focus and that was load 
shedding.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka, I think we must move on. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 59 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think there has been enough time for the 
war room.  Let us move on to specific issues.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair, and then on the 
liquidity, this problem Ms Brown that you have mentioned, I 
know you have touched on that in regards to her affidavit.  
You have seen she refers to not herself, but the board 
writing in the financials, that Eskom will be a going concern 
10 
in the foreseeable future.  
 
The very board of Dr Ben Ngubane.  Are you saying 
despite that ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  They were not a going concern at that time.  A 
foreseeable future, they also said we will have no load 
shedding in the foreseeable future.  They also said that we 
will be liquid in the foreseeable future.  We were just going, 
Eskom was going from one crisis to the next crisis dealing 
with load shedding and liquidity. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, so in respect of the liquidity, a 
20 
statement made in the financials, as a statement of the 
directors, are you saying that was not truthful? 
MS BROWN:  I think them saying that in the foreseeable 
future is truthful, but when was the foreseeable future?  I 
think, I do not say it is not truthful.  They probably saw a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 60 of 331 
 
light at the end of the tunnel, but the light at the end of the 
tunnel did not survive the salaries on a monthly basis.  
 
That was, that has always been my fight with Eskom 
anyway.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  Because the quotation she takes 
from the financials, which is her statement she says was 
signed by Dr Ngubane and Mr Pamensky, reads that: 
 
“The directors have made an assessment of the 
ability of Eskom and the group to continue as a 
going concern in the foreseeable future.  The 
10 
directors 
viewed 
Eskom’s 
and 
the 
group’s 
performance for the year ended 31 March 2015, 
and the cash flow forecast for the multi-year 
prize  determination, three year period ending 
31 March 2018, the directors are satisfied that 
Eskom and the group have access to adequate 
resources and facilities to be able to continue 
its 
operations 
for 
the 
foreseeable 
future.  
Accordingly the board continued to adopt the 
going concern basis in preparing the financial 
20 
statements.” 
 
So they are sitting that Eskom is a going concern 
and that this statement, I want you to comment on. 
MS BROWN:  I, well Advocate Seleke, Seleka.  It is a, it is 
a, the fact that Eskom was a going concern in the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 61 of 331 
 
foreseeable future I understand.  I also think that I believe 
that Eskom would be a going concern in the foreseeable 
future.   
 
We got the 23 billion bailout.  I think it was just after 
or just before May, or in or around that time, but in my 
estimation, the queries that came to me from both the 
board, the Chair and the executive, we were not seeing the 
light at the end of the tunnel yet.   
 
We probably, there is a light but it is in time to 
come.  As far as I was concerned, the crisis was then and 
10 
you must remember, and it was on a weekend that the 
president called me to tell me that, and it could have been 
somewhere in February, March of that year.  
 
I cannot remember, but to tell me that there would 
be a black out in the Gauteng area.  Now the blackout has 
nothing to do with the liquidity situation.  But the liquidity 
situation had everything to do with whether Eskom was able 
to get out of the mess it was in, so you know I retain my 
position that Eskom might have had a – and Eskom 
projects with the multi-year, the NYPD, they also project 
20 
with NERSA, what NERSA allows them to claw-back from 
the clients, and every year, the budget looked in a 
particular way and then NERSA says that they had to 
collect far less than what they were, they were projecting.  
 
So the Chair asked the question earlier about 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 62 of 331 
 
oversights and that was part of the dilemma.  We had good 
documentation it looked like we could be on a sure footing 
but the documentation or the expectation of what that 
documentation meant could never be met, was never met. 
So they build into their predictions, what NERSA would be 
giving them as a crawl back from the public.  
And Chair, you know, if I did not hear complaints 
from the CE, from the Chair, that we were in dire straits, 
frantic phone calls, then I probably would agree with Mr 
Molefe that we were fine, we were a going concern and 
10 
that the only problem we had was load shedding.   
But I personally feel that they projected and this is 
what I say to companies all the time, they project 
themselves out of a crisis and they never ever meet that 
projection, because it is not solely reliable on them.  It is 
also reliable on what NERSA would give them, and what 
they can crawl back from the public.  
And remember, the public will also going off grid, so 
fewer and fewer people were on the grid.  I think, now, I 
see part of Eskom I think about 2% of the public - we are 
20 
not able, I mean Eskom is not able to gather money from 
about 2%, they decreased by 2% annually, let me put it to 
you that way the use of electricity by the public.  So that is 
my comment to you Advocate Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Should I exercise some restrictions or 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 63 of 331 
 
as you call it lead the witness? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I expect you to go to a very 
specific Eskom issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I mean…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you have taken some time on the 
matters that you have covered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, no in respect of the responses 
should I – okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well exercise your judgment, but I feel 
that you may wish to move faster to the other issues.  If 
10 
you are left with some more time at the end, you might 
wish to come back to some of these issues, I am 
suspecting you might run out of time.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no let me make my last comment 
on this one is Ms Brown because those two contrasting 
positions cannot exist side by side.  When the Board says 
the Board continued to adopt the going concern basis in 
preparing the financial statements.  They seem to adopt 
the view that they are at that stage going in a going 
concern status as opposed to the opposite.  So all I am 
20 
saying to you is the two positions cannot exist side by 
side, either you are a going concern or you were not.  
MS BROWN:   I do not want to continue and go on and on 
and on but I have made my position, well what I felt was 
quite clear.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 64 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no thank you.  In regard to load 
shedding, well we probably need to follow a sequence 
because I will be getting out of a sequence, but let us see.  
In regard to load shedding insofar as you have mentioned 
is that, Eskom you brought in experienced people who were 
able to stop load shedding, an investigation was instituted, 
and 
there 
were 
some 
outcomes 
made 
from 
that 
investigation.  
 
I would like to take you back to what Ms Mokholo 
says about your statements at the Board meeting of 11 
10 
March 2015, and only for the purposes of her statements 
because I will come to the sequence of events.  But she 
says in her affidavit: 
“That the Minister began addressing the Board on 
the issues of the War Room and the challenges 
facing 
the 
War 
Room. 
 
Some 
of 
the 
issues 
pertaining to the decision to switch off non-paying 
municipalities, the issues of director ’s liabilities, 
mishandling of load shedding by Eskom and the 
sabotaging 
of 
power 
stations, 
which 
are 
all 
20 
operational matters.  There was an allegation made 
to the executives that load shedding might be 
intentionally 
manipulated, 
mishandling 
of 
load 
shedding and sabotaging of power stations.” 
Do you recall these comments made by yourself? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 65 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   I can - I do not know about the power 
stations, but I, and I did not see it in the minutes.  Even 
my off the cuff minutes, I did not see it in there.  But I can 
tell you that I did go into operational matters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but let us stick to load shedding. 
MS BROWN:   It was just before, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, let us just stick to load shedding 
for a moment. The concept that load shedding was 
mishandled or manipulated. 
MS BROWN:   Well, I was had a difficulty that when 
10 
Parliament example, I used an example, and that was in 
that was actually in the minutes of that meeting and now I 
am just using my memory.  I had a difficulty that we would 
have load shedding and terrible load shedding twice, three 
times a day and then we have an opening of Parliament 
and we have no load shedding from before the opening to 
the day after the opening.  
Now if you can keep the lights on for three days, all 
the lights on for three days.  Then why are you not - and of 
course it is operational and I am not a Mr Koko so I do not 
20 
know the details but I mean, I did have a difficulty with that 
because if you can suddenly not have any load shedding 
and then we go into terrible stage three load shedding 
where the lights are off for ordinary people three times a 
day, and because Parliament has a State of the Nation 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 66 of 331 
 
Address and this was in Jacob Zuma’s time you suddenly 
can keep the lights on for three days.  
So yes, I did have a problem with it but frankly, it 
was operational and I concede that I should not have 
gotten into the operational matters.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka. 
MS BROWN:   I did not see the Board often. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mr Seleka except in the context of 
oversight 
and 
except 
in 
the 
context 
of 
Mr 
Koko’s 
allegations that when he was suspended, there was an 
10 
allegation of sabotage, which could affect load shedding. 
Why is load shedding relevant to our terms of reference? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Why is load shedding relevant to the 
terms of reference? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, except in the context of oversight, 
performance of oversight and Mr Koko’s allegation that 
when he was suspended, he said he was accused – there 
was an allegation of sabotage which could affect load 
shedding. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the question is limited to that 
20 
Chair, I am not pursuing it any more beyond that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us try and move, I am more 
keen on those specific issues on which we have had quite 
some evidence.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 67 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the secondment of Mr Molefe and 
the secondment of Mr Singh, the cancellation of the 
meeting of the Board of Eskom that was scheduled for the 
26 t h of February.   
The meeting of the 9 t h but she was not at that 
meeting, but that meeting of the 11 t h she was there and 
then 
Mr 
Tsotsi’s 
evidence, 
the 
suspension 
of 
the 
executives. Those, are only some of the most important 
issues I have here on Mr Tsotsi’s evidence also gives me 
the impression of Mr Salim Essa and the meeting with M 
10 
Brown a meeting with Mr Salim Essa. For me, those are the 
issues that I am very keen to hear her evidence on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Shall I ask her Chairperson to start 
with the appointment of the Board members? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine ja that is important to 
their appointment, I think start there because in terms of 
sequences start with the appointment of the 2015 Board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She has given some evidence with 
regard to what happened, what the position of the state of 
20 
Eskom was when she was appointed in 2014, and then for 
the rest of 2014, until December the Board that was in 
existence was the one that was Chaired by Mr Tsotsi Soda, 
that Board left and then a new Board was appointed in 
December, Tsotsi was appointed, Mr Tsotsi was appointed 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 68 of 331 
 
Chairperson.   
Ja, that is the events around the appointment and 
the composition of committees of the Board and then we 
move in terms of sequence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Ms Brown, we understand from 
the evidence of Ms Mokholo and this is in regard to the 
appointment of Board members.  That when the 2015 
Eskom Board was appointed, members were appointed, 
which were appointed on or about 11 December 2014.  
The normal practice of a database at DPE pulling 
10 
names from the database and populating the Boards of the 
SOE was not followed, where instead you requested that 
an advert be published calling for members of the public to 
make themselves available to serve on the Board of 
Eskom. Is that your recollection as well, that is what 
happened? 
MS BROWN:   My most – well the adverts will add to the 
database. It is the first - well I have probably did not read 
her affidavit or did not think there was a problem when I 
read the affidavit but I thought the advert was actually a 
20 
good idea to add to the database because they had a 
database but the database did not necessarily give the 
desired effect year on year on, and I think even now, after I 
have left three years ago, we can see that the same thing 
is happening with the Board.  So that is why I had the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 69 of 331 
 
advertisement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the question is raised in this 
context, because when you sit back and look at members 
of the Board that got appointed to the tongue, you see that 
some of them have, if not, most of the time, had some 
either previous connection or association with either Mr 
Salim Essa or the Gupta’s and one wonders, but why not 
follow the database and do the advert and you asked this 
Board members, how did you get appointed?  
They say well, I came across an advert in the 
10 
newspaper and many of them were getting appointed for 
the first time to serve on the Board of an SOE.  Do you 
think this was merely…[intervene] 
MS BROWN:   Many of them did not – many of them also 
served on Boards of SOE’s prior and I think Advocate 
Seleka with due respect to you many of them were also not 
people who had anything to do with the Gupta’s or with 
Salim Essa. 
So I think your question in itself is quite loaded but 
having said that, I get involved at the beginning of the 
20 
process, where I sign off on an advert.  They decide what 
to criteria – the DPE decides on the criteria and then at the 
end of the process, I get involved again, when they present 
me with a list.  I am not sure if you have asked every one 
of them of the Board members if they knew the Gupta’s and 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 70 of 331 
 
if you had and if you had the 13 of them and if you can 
measure how many of them knew the Gupta’s or not.  When 
I saw the newspaper article that you are referring to now, 
you are not referring to the newspaper article, but you are 
referring to the popular narrative.  
When I saw that newspaper article, I started 
phoning them and one person asked me yes but who is Des 
Van Rooyen, I do not even know the man and it came to 
pass that three or four years ago, her husband did some 
work for MKMVA, that is how she got to know.  Another 
10 
person said to me, and I cannot remember who they are 
because it is a long time ago, another person said, well, I 
worked for a particular accounting company and I did the 
accounting work for the Gupta’s computer company.  
Does that mean that she worked for the Gupta’s or 
she knew the Gupta’s, somebody said, I met them at a 
wedding.  You know, so I frankly, this is the kind of 
questions that I really would like to refute here now 
because I open up the process so that it is transparent.  I 
open up the process to increase the database, the pool of 
20 
people we can draw from, I open up the process, so that 
the process for being on a Board it is not closed in year 
ten and I am coming in year 15.  
I actually got such a shock with that Board, those 
Board appointments that in 2018 I did something very 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 71 of 331 
 
different.  I actually asked all the companies, all the sector 
organisations like the black Business Council, business 
Leadership South Africa, etcetera, etcetera to send me 
three names.  Not me personally send the department three 
names so that I could do it differently.  
So that I am not accused again, of maybe not to 
Gupta’s this time, but something else but that is what I did, 
I thought it was the right thing to do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, now I know the person you are 
referring to as having worked, or did an audit for the Gupta 
10 
companies 
is 
Ms 
Miriam 
Cassim, 
but 
you 
have 
not 
mentioned Dr Ngubane, Mr Pamensky, Ms V Naidoo, 
Viroshini Naidoo and you are yet to get the affidavit of Mr 
Romeo Khumalo I understand from your advocate.  
All the names have mentioned. 
MS BROWN:   I can respond. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, but can I continue …[intervene] 
MS BROWN:   And neither can you answer on Pat Naidoo 
or Zithembe Khoza or, I mean they - you know, the point I 
am – I am making the broader points that I would not know 
20 
…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Ms Brown, I think Mr Seleka 
had not finished his point of question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, what I want to say to you is this 
names I have mentioned the persons I have mentioned.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 72 of 331 
 
They say in their affidavits, what dealings they had with 
the Gupta’s and or Salim Essa.  My putting of this to you, 
is exactly to give you the opportunity for you to either 
refute as you say, or to explain whether or not you had 
knowledge of what they have stated in their affidavits.  
So it is not in any way to cast dispersions on you, it 
is just a process of putting a version to you. If you 
understand what I am saying, then you can respond. 
MS BROWN:   I do understand what you say and my 
previous profession was actually an English teacher.   
10 
Advocate…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no Ms Brown I do not think that is 
…[intervene] 
MS BROWN:   So, ...[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on. 
MS BROWN:   I am sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on.  I think that is not fair 
on Mr Seleka because I do not think that when he said - he 
asked whether you understood, I do not think he was 
saying that because he thought you did not understand the 
20 
English language.  
I think what he was saying is, you might not 
understand the purpose of why he was putting these things 
to you, so I do not think he meant you did not understand 
the language. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 73 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   A huge apologies Chair, I have an 
unfortunate tendency to just jump at things.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
MS BROWN:   Chair, let me please put this thing to you.  
As I said earlier, in the interest of transparency, I did want 
to open up the process and I did so.  I did not – when they 
vetted the companies and when they vetted people, I did 
not think that they should be vetting the people for 
anything more than what they usually vet people for.  
So the group of people who come to me have been 
10 
vetted already.  They not people who have not been vetted 
and when the issue got raised in the media, I then 
instituted a second conflict of interest process where I say 
you do it at the beginning when you are appointed, and 
then in the middle of the year you do another conflict of 
interest.  
And it is in that in that area that even though Mr 
Pamensky for example, and I remember this one very 
clearly. He listed that he was from Oakbay, I cannot 
remember a Oakbay company, and this was a Gupta linked 
20 
company.  I asked him to resign or to choose that is what I 
asked him to do and he chose to resign, I think.  
So, yes, it was not something that I constructed in 
order to get a particular grouping of people in, I followed a 
process and if Ms Mokholo and I have no reason to doubt 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 74 of 331 
 
her to say that I went beyond their database, then - and 
opened up the process, which I thought was a good idea at 
the time, clearly it had unintended consequences for me 
but that is the process that I followed.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   What, what…[intervene] 
MS BROWN:   And I actually did, I do not know what more 
to say about this process.  I have spoken to this issue over 
and over in the media in explaining to everyone how the 
process happened and I am telling you this process as 
well.  
10 
 
I, for example, also know that there are people who 
were not, who said they were not, they did not know the 
Gupta’s but you see a bigger issue for me, is if the Gupta 
companies in terms of the PFMA if they were blacklisted, 
as the PFMA requires of National Treasury annually to 
blacklist these companies, my department would have 
picked it up in January, when Mr Pamensky said that he 
worked or he was the director of Oakbay they would have 
picked it up in January already and that is just using one 
example.  But yes, that is my only response that I have. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, given the incident of 2013, and 
the media coverage of the Gupta’s since then, do you think 
they needed to be blacklisted in order to be a red flag, any 
association of them to raise the red flag? 
MS BROWN:   I do I think you should actually, look I would 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 75 of 331 
 
not for myself, but I think we should be able to - I mean, if 
you red flag anyone, for any reason, you must be able to 
give a fair, there must be a fair process.  So that either 
they are able to defend themselves that they are doing the 
right thing, or it is put to them, or they are blacklisted, and 
they are then allowed to go and do this, go and context it 
in a court of law.  
But having said that, I mean, this is how I would 
think any law abiding citizen would think about it, but 
having said that, I did not release all of them because they 
10 
were in some way or the other.  I did not fire them, 
because they were in some way or the other linked to the 
Gupta’s because none of it was actually direct.   
It was either through somebody – and I mean, I did 
speak to a number of them at the time and it was not - I did 
not think I should let them go, I should fire them because 
they were linked to the Gupta’s.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   You mentioned earlier this resulted in 
unintended 
consequences 
to 
you. 
What 
unintended 
consequences were you referring to? 
20 
MS BROWN:   Well, I am now being said the fact that I 
have 
opened 
up 
the 
process 
is 
the 
unintended 
consequences that I have - and I have lived with this for 
the last five years that I have appointed Gupta - in fact, 
the Public Protector makes that point that I have appointed 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 76 of 331 
 
Gupta appointed or Gupta linked people to the Board.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you have any relations with the 
Gupta’s? 
MS BROWN:   I know the eldest brother, and I tried to work 
out remember his name earlier but I know none of the 
others. I have met the eldest brother, Ajay Gupta, about 13 
or 15 or 10 years ago when I was MSC for Finance.  I was 
on a trip to India with the then Premier and the Minister in 
the Presidency, Minister then Minister Essop Pahad, I met 
him. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That was long before you were 
appointed as the Minister of DPE.  
MS BROWN:   Yes, and he in fact on the day that I was 
appointed.  The day I was sworn in, I showed my friends 
who were friends of mine from my province, I showed my 
friends that he Ajay Gupta was phoning me.  I showed it to 
them on the phone and of course, it became a great story 
in the newspaper, but I did show them that he sent me a 
message or not send me a message he phoned me I did not 
take his call because I was in a public place. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well let us take the lunch adjournment 
now.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you may have forgotten to keep an 
eye on the time Mr Seleka.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 77 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will take the lunch break now.  We 
will resume at five past two and we adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  
MS BROWN:   Thank you, Chair.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you continue Mr Seleka I just want 
to say something with regard to Ms Brown’s various 
affidavits that she has filed.  I was looking at some of them 
10 
and I noticed  
1. That one of probably the first one that she filed she 
complained that she had not been given the full 
statements or affidavits of the people who had testified 
or whose affidavits had been filed which she was 
expected to deal with in this regard I think Mr Saloojee 
was one of them; his affidavit and I think Mr Tlagudi if I 
am not mistaken. 
So I just want to find out whether the commission did 
ultimately give her full documentation because if some 
20 
reason she was not given she should be given so that is l. 
2. I see in one of her affidavits that she mentions having 
applied for leave to cross-examine Mr Jonas.  Now it 
has been a long time I cannot always remember all the 
applications for leave to cross-examine that I have 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 78 of 331 
 
dealt with and those that I might not have dealt with. 
But I just do not want anything to fall through the 
cracks.  So I just want to check either from her or the 
legal team whether on these two issues there is 
anything that they – is still outstanding and maybe 
other issues that I might not have picked up. 
ADV LUSENGA:  I can – I can assist Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Insofar as the information relating to the 
three Denel witnesses is concerned the matter has become 
10 
academic we subsequently received all the information we 
needed in respect of those transcripts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so there is no issue. 
ADV LUSENGA:   And affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LUSENGA:  That issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Has fallen away. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Has fallen away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV LUSENGA:  The application for the cross-examination 
20 
of Ubaba Mcebisi Jonas that application was tabled and 
heard and was not granted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 
ADV LUSENGA:  Some time in 2019 thereabout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 79 of 331 
 
ADV LUSENGA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So – but otherwise there are no 
other 
issues 
I 
have 
not 
picked 
up 
which 
are 
still 
outstanding that she has raised in one or other affidavit. 
ADV LUSENGA:  There is just one loose end if I can put it 
that way is that in respect of the three Denel witnesses 
Baba Tlakudi, Baba Riaz Saloojee and Mam Van Rensburg 
there was an application to give evidence against their 
versions as it were.  Nothing happened of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
10 
ADV LUSENGA:  And I suppose that has become academic 
as she has been I think she will testify in any way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no she will testify.  She will testify 
ja. 
ADV LUSENGA:  (speaking over one another).  She will 
testify it has become really academic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that is final she will be 
given a chance to testify.  Okay no I just thought because I 
picked these things up I wanted to make sure that we know 
where everything is in regard to them.  Okay.  Mr Seleka 
20 
you may proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Brown you can 
hear us? 
MS BROWN:  I can. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you very much.  Back again to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 80 of 331 
 
the board with whatever called the Collared Connections 
Association or dealings with the Gupta’s insofar as some of 
the board members had those connections.  The – the 
reason again that – that question being put to you is 
exactly for you to give a response in regard to – insofar as 
that board was being called the Gupta board.  But I want to 
take it further because on the evidence that we have we 
see that the boards that became as from December 2014 at 
least the boards insofar as we have examined the evidence 
seems to have been quite sympathetic to the transactions 
10 
that were in relation to the Gupta owned entities or an 
entity relating to Mr Salim Essa.  And in this case I am 
talking either Regiments  which was later Trillian when Mr 
Eric Wood established Trillian with Mr Salim Essa and on 
the other hand in regard to the Gupta’s you have the 
Tegeta Company that received some transactions from 
Eskom and pre-payments at least one of R659 million. 
 
We will – those facts do not pertain to you but I am 
raising them with you in regard to dealing with the 
reputation and image of this board.  I do not know whether 
20 
were you aware of these facts in the manner in which the 
board handled matters that related to Tegeta on the one 
hand and Trillian on the other.   
MS BROWN:  They would give me a PFMA application if I 
were in any way to be involved in procurement.  I received 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 81 of 331 
 
no PFMA application in relation to those two matters.  So I 
do not really have enough evidence on that.   
 
I also do not have enough evidence that the only 
procurement 
matters 
that 
they 
oversaw 
had 
– 
was 
exclusively about the Gupta’s.  So I do not have – they 
send a PFMA application to me if it is over a certain 
amount of money and it is not just in the general 
operational budgets that they are allowed to have.  
 
I do say though anything over R10 million had to be 
secured by National – had to be overseen by National 
10 
Treasury so I do not get to see it and that is in terms of the 
PFMA. 
 
I do not have – look I have read it in the 
newspapers. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  I have asked the board about it but as far as 
I know those were not the only matters that they were 
seized with – with at the time in relation to procurement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. Insofar as this matter is … 
MS BROWN:  So… 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Sorry carry on. 
MS BROWN:  So no I do not – I did not have a – I do not 
have insight into the procurement matters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Insofar as the matters received 
media attention the specific matters of Tegeta, specific 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 82 of 331 
 
matters of Trillian and you made enquiries with the board 
or shall I ask you rather, did you make enquiries with the 
board 
in 
regard 
to 
those 
specific 
matters? 
 
Not 
necessarily… 
MS BROWN:  I did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja not necessarily on procurement but 
on why are you making a pre-payment?  Why are you 
making a decision of R1.68 billion pre-payment overnight?  
Why are you paying Tegeta a pre-payment of R659 million 
also virtually overnight?  And if you did what is – what 
10 
does the board say to you? 
MS BROWN:  I might not have asked it whether it was done 
overnight because I do not think I remember having read 
that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  But I did ask them why they had the – what 
happened around Tegeta?  As far as I am concerned it was 
a direct sale from Glencore selling Optimum Mine to the 
Gupta’s.  So that was a direct sale.   
 
I asked the executives about the pre-payment 
20 
because they were in a – no I called them – I called them 
up and I asked the executives about a pre-payment and I 
was told that pre-payments was – it is something that they 
did in order to secure coal and they have done it before 
and they have done it often before. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 83 of 331 
 
 
So if I –  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  That is my answer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes now those are issues we have 
raised with the executives – of the members of the board in 
fact and some of the executives.  We – we will pursue that 
with them.  Did you see – did you find – were you troubled 
by the media reports?  Did you have concerns about the 
manner in which these transactions were done? 
MS BROWN:  I was very troubled by the media reports and 
10 
that is why I asked them. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  What happened...   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Ja I – and so it did trouble me but I also you 
know now would like to just go off a bit. 
 
The media reports one thing.  The issue is that we 
had 
to 
investigate 
whether 
those 
matters 
actually 
happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
MS BROWN:  And so the DVG of Energy would be seized 
with this matter as to whether or not the board – whether 
or not it was a true reflection of the transaction. 
 
So when I do my speech at this – at a budget 
hearing I actually would speak to issues of the cost of coal 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 84 of 331 
 
and so forth and I think I even in one of my speeches I 
think I even – because of the responses from the 
executives and the responses from my own department I 
believed that the Tegeta Mine was giving us coal at R150 
per ton and eventually it was R400 per ton which was much 
lower than what any other – what most other companies 
were giving. 
 
So whilst I was – so to say it in a nutshell I was 
concerned about it.  I was concerned about the media 
reports on it.  I raised it with them.  They have given me 
10 
answers that were sufficiently good to me because they 
said that they have done this before.  They have done it 
with all the other mining companies – or with most of the 
other mining companies and I am – would like to just leave 
it there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I may come back to show you certain – 
to just put to you certain things on that but in the interest 
of time let us – let us go back to the meetings that were 
scheduled for the board in 2015.   
 
There was a first meeting of the board scheduled 
20 
for the 26 t h of February 2015.  You would recall that that 
was cancelled on the basis that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it oversight or is it deliberate to skip 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 85 of 331 
 
the beginning of the board’s soon after its appointment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The sub-committees? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is not an oversight Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am waiting for a document to be 
printed out for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  Okay alright.  You see I – it is 
just that I like it when incidents or events are dealt with in 
terms of the sequence in which they happened. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it makes it much more easier 
but if – if you need some document before you can deal 
with it it is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a strategy of some sort.  Yes Ms 
Brown I will come to that issue the Chair is drawing to my 
attention but there was a meeting you would recall – a 
board meeting scheduled for the 26 t h of February 2015.   
20 
 
This meeting Ms Mokgolo would have told you about 
a call from the President – President Jacob Zuma at the 
time.  Can you recall that in regard to this? 
MS BROWN:  Yes I recall the meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 86 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  From her testimony.  I recall the meeting 
from her having told me.  I do not recall the same incidents 
that she says but I recall the meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes well you will give the Chairperson 
your recollection in a short while but the evidence goes 
along these lines. 
 
That Mr President had – President Jacob Zuma at 
the time called her and told her that he was trying to get 
hold of you.  The long and short is that he wanted the 
meeting – the board meeting of Eskom scheduled for the 
10 
26 t h to be – to be either postponed or cancelled and that 
she should get hold of Mr Tsotsi to convey that message 
which is what she did and Mr Tsotsi wanted to know from 
her for what reason should the meeting be postponed or 
cancelled. She was not given an answer but she says 
reluctantly to him that it is the President who wanted the 
meeting to be postponed. 
 
Please insofar as you can recall and particularly her 
reporting to you about this meeting or the cancellation and 
the request from the President please relate to the 
20 
Chairperson your recollection of the events. 
MS BROWN:  I returned from my trip abroad.  Remember 
that somebody stands in for me when I am out of the 
country and it is never my Deputy Minister.  I do not recall 
who it is who stood in for me that day.  That I think it was a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 87 of 331 
 
three day trip that I was on.   
 
When – according to Ms Mokgolo’s statement she 
says that I said when she told me about meeting I did not 
look perplexed or anything.  I – in fact she used the term 
which is not in my lexicon eish or eish or what – however 
you say it but she used that term she said I said. 
 
Now I want to refute that I used that term. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja she … 
MS BROWN:  Because it is just not in my languages.  I 
never use the term.  Secondly I use very few slang words.  
10 
Secondly I – she said I did not – and I am assuming she 
did not use the word perplexed but I am assuming that she 
meant that I did not look surprised at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe – I am sorry Ms Brown.  Let me 
just tell you the impression I got from when she gave 
evidence in terms of your reaction and my impression of 
what your reaction was based on what she was saying 
maybe wrong but the impression I got was that you were 
thinking and this is not what she said – my impression. You 
were thinking something like oh maybe that should not 
20 
have happened.  It was not something you – you were very 
pleased about.  That was my impression. 
MS BROWN:  No of course not.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That was my impression.   It is not what 
she 
said 
but 
when 
she 
gave 
evidence 
that 
is 
the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 88 of 331 
 
impression I got. 
MS BROWN:  I – Chair I was not pleased with it because 
firstly I do not think that any of us unless there is a good 
reason and when I say us I mean anyone in the executive 
should not be cancelling and interfering in board meetings.  
 
I did not stress to Ms Mokgolo my view.  I – 
because I did not think it was right to express my view of 
my principle to my  
MS BROWN:  Officials. 
MS BROWN:  Official. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  So I did not express it at all.  But my view is 
that they should not be cancelling anyone’s meetings 
especially board meetings.  It then becomes an issue of 
interference.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe – maybe I got the right 
impression even though she did not say – she did not say 
you were not pleased or anything but it looks like I got the 
right impression.  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you were still – I interrupted you 
while you were still saying something and I am sorry about 
that.  If you still remember what you were still going to say 
you must do so but otherwise Mr Seleka will remind you of 
what his question was and then you can add if you want to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 89 of 331 
 
add. 
MS BROWN:  I am long winded Chair please just continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes that is – that is alright.  Okay Ms 
Brown you were talking more about – I mean your response 
was about refuting what she is saying but I would like you 
to tell the Chairperson what is your recollection and what 
you – what did you do in regard to what you heard the 
President had requested. 
MS BROWN:  I cannot remember if I did anything.  I might 
10 
have as it would be my nature at the next meeting that I 
met the President I might have said something about it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did the President speak to you? 
MS BROWN:  But I cannot remember.  No the President did 
not speak to me about the cancellation of that meeting at 
the time because remember he could not get hold of me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But you also said that… 
MS BROWN:  And he could not get 00:23:06. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay please continue. 
20 
MS BROWN:  And he could not get hold of my Deputy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said that you would have had a 
colleague in the cabinet acting in your position as acting 
Minister of Public Enterprises during your absence from the 
country and you said you cannot remember who it was.  I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 90 of 331 
 
am just surprised that in terms of the evidence that we 
have been told there is no suggestion that the then 
President had looked for the acting Minister to speak to 
him or her but had looked for a Deputy instead when he 
could not get hold of you.  But you might not be able to say 
anything about that but your recollection is clear that there 
was an acting Minister. 
MS BROWN:  Oh there always is an acting Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  When a Minister leaves. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  And the assumption is that the acting 
Minister will work with the Deputy Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Because the Deputy Minister does not have 
the same delegated authorities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  That the Minister would have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  But I do not – I really do not know what – 
20 
what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  I think you were mentioning that 
in the context of what Ms Mokgolo says President Zuma 
said you are in charge that she is in charge if you are not 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 91 of 331 
 
there. 
MS BROWN:  No but I mean she is an official.  She is in 
charge – she is an accounting officer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes no. 
MS BROWN:  I am the executive authority. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes no I understand I am saying… 
MS BROWN:  I do not – I really do not know any of the 
conversation that happened between the President then 
and Ms – the acting DG. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Yes so you are correcting the 
10 
statement that she says that President Zuma would have 
made to her which is when she said the Minister is not here 
the President said to her but you are in charge – you are 
the DG. You are the acting DG you are in charge.  Is that 
what you are seeking to correct? 
MS BROWN:  No I am not.  I am saying that she is an 
accounting officer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  I do not know the conversation that the 
President and her have had.   So I cannot say that that is 
20 
what the President said at the time.  And she is an 
accounting officer but she does not have responsibility 
over the board.  The only person who can speak to the 
board is through a delegated authority given to me by the 
President to do one part of his large portfolio of everything 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 92 of 331 
 
and that is to be the Minister of Public Enterprises that is 
the only – so I am the one who speaks to the Chair.  But 
because the President could not get hold of me he then 
spoke with Ms Mokgolo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Mokgolo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But you personally leaving aside the 
incident regarding the President’s call to Ms Mokgolo were 
you aware that there was a meeting of the board of Eskom 
scheduled for the 26 t h of February? 
10 
MS BROWN:  No.  I would have known the board member – 
the board meetings unless it has something to do with me.  
The board meets regularly it meets the committees meet all 
the time.  I do not know when they meet.  They do not send 
me a schedule of our meetings. I do not request it from 
them either.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now… 
MS BROWN:  The board acts as a – the boards acts as an 
entity on its own.  It actually has its own legislation as well 
– its own Act. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Okay let us – let us move on 
further.  That meeting gets to be cancelled as the message 
conveyed by Ms Mokgolo to Mr Tsotsi ultimately.  Mr Tsotsi 
then gets to be called to a meeting with the President in 
Durban on Sunday the 8 t h of March 2015.  In that meeting 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 93 of 331 
 
he finds Ms Dudu Myeni according to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you deliberately skipping this – the 
6 t h Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The 6 t h? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or is it oversight? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that is Mr Linnell. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Ms Dudu Myeni. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In Pretoria. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes I will add it Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I will certainly add it.  I was just 
focussing on Mr Tsotsi’s version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because the discussion in that meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which did not have Mr – which Mr Tsotsi 
did not attend is important. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For purposes of establishing what the 
Minister may have known about the subject before that 
20 
meeting between Mr Linnell and Ms Dudu Myeni happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Okay.  Let me – let me add that 
factor as well or facts Ms Brown. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe I can do it for you then she can 
deal with both. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 94 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Brown the evidence that I have heard 
from a certain Mr Linnell is that on the 6 t h of March 2015 
he was – he got a call from Ms Dudu Myeni who in effect 
asked her – asked him to drop everything and he was in 
Cape Town and travel to Pretoria because the President 
according to Ms Dudu Myeni to meet, have a meeting with 
him.   He dropped everything and flew to Pretoria.  Had a 
meeting with Ms Dudu Myeni.  The understanding was that 
the three of them were going to the meeting with – the two 
10 
of them were going to a meeting with the President, and at 
that meeting of the two of them, because ultimately, they 
did not meet with the President on that day. 
 
Ms Dudu Myeni said there needed to be an 
inquiry into the affairs of Eskom and the President, I think, 
wanted an inquiry and she had recommended that that 
inquiry should be done or could be done by Linnell.   
 
Do you know whether, as at that time or prior to 
the 6 t h of May, you have any recollection whether the 
President may have had a discussion with you about any 
20 
need for an inquiry into the affairs of Eskom? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 6 t h of March, Chair. 
MS BROWN:   Are you asking about prior to the 6 t h of May? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, prior to the 6 t h of May. 
MS BROWN:   Okay. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 95 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, prior to the ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   No, I do not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the 6 t h ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   No, I do not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the 6 t h of May, you have not – 
you had no such discussion with the former President? 
MS BROWN:   No, I did not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May I correct something?  It is March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When...  The 6 t h of March 2016, okay.  
When did you hear for the first time about this supposed 
10 
need for an inquiry into the affairs of Eskom in 2015 if you 
are able to recall? 
MS BROWN:   You see, Chair, I had a view that since – it 
did not matter what the existing board and executives 
wanted to do.  They never – we could never – there was 
never a plan with strategic blocks to get us to a point 
where we can actually say we are going to be dealing with 
load-shedding and the liquidity issue.  They never got into 
those blocks.   
 
So I always had a view and initially I thought 
20 
that view would be a successful view through the War 
Room that we should have an investigation but the 
investigation in the War Room seemed to be quite a 
technical one.  It was not about dealing with the nitty-gritty 
of us dealing with the issue of load-shedding or Eskom 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 96 of 331 
 
dealing with the issue of load-shedding. 
 
So I heard from somebody’s testimony, I cannot 
remember, that the President in the 8 t h Meeting then says 
that he will call me and I assume that he did call me.  And I 
was quite happy to have an inquiry because I wanted an 
inquiry to understand what the problem was and how we 
get out of the problem. 
 
And I did not want it to be with anybody that 
knew Eskom who did work for Eskom.  So if the President 
tells me in his discussion with me or did I tell him in the 
10 
discussion with him, I cannot tell you but I did not do it 
before the 6 t h of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS BROWN:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  But I hear you say that 
you assumed that he told you or called you after the 
meeting of the 8 t h of March.  Is that because you have no 
recollection whether after that meeting of the 8 t h of March 
he did raise the issue with you? 
MS BROWN:   I do not have a recollection of it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS BROWN:   At all.  I just know that the President was 
seized with the matter of the load-shedding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  But you are – what you 
have said is that in your own mind you did think that it 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 97 of 331 
 
would be necessary to have some investigation of some 
kind into what the problems were at Eskom and how they 
could be addressed successfully. 
 
And initially you thought they would – the War 
Room might be the right vehicle for that but then after 
some time, you thought that might not be working but in 
your mind the idea ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   It was just...  Yes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...investigations was something you were 
thinking it could be a good idea. 
10 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ms Brown, do you recall whether 
in your conversation with the President there was any talk 
about any suspension or stepping aside of the executives? 
MS BROWN:   No, not at all.  I do not recall that at all.  In 
fact, I think the first time I heard about it was the – the – if 
- I thought a lot about this particular issue.  I think the first 
time I heard about the suspension, the stepping aside.  I 
never heard about the suspensions.  I heard about the 
20 
stepping aside of the executives.   
 
It was actually a – when mister – I do not recall 
a letter coming to me from the chairperson at the time to 
invite me to a meeting.  I think what he did was call me.  
And one of the issues that he raised with me was the issue 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 98 of 331 
 
of having an inquiry and he told me...   
 
I must tell you, I was very hurt by it because I 
was not called and I was the designated Minister but 
maybe in retrospect it was not such a bad idea.  But the 
issue is that I think... 
 
I cannot remember but it might be that he said 
and in order to do this inquiry and I was happy.  Look, 
when I heard the inquiry I was very happy because I 
wanted this inquiry.   
 
I did to know where we would get the money.  I 
10 
did not know if we had the money but I was happy for the 
inquiry.  But I think he could have told me but Chair, you 
know, it is seven years ago.   
 
I do not have a – I cannot tell you exactly.  It 
could also be that as they walk me, they meet me at the 
car, the chair of the portfolio – sorry, the chair of the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of the board. 
MS BROWN:   ...of Eskom, meets me at the car when I 
arrived at Megawatt Park and then walks me into the 
20 
meeting.  He could have also told me there but somehow I 
must have known that there was a meeting that I was 
called to on the 11 t h of March to talk about the inquiry and 
the stepping aside.   
 
Now the only person that I spoke with.  Between 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 99 of 331 
 
the 8 t h and the 11 t h, I could have spoken to the President.  
The 9 t h or the 10 t h or the 9 t h I could have spoken to the 
chair.  I am just not sure who I spoke with but the chair 
must have invited me to the meeting. 
 
I would very like if the – I mean, I am not sure if 
the Commission still has investigators, that they had and 
go and find out if a letter was written to me because I do 
not have – I do not have a recollection of a letter being 
written to be me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS BROWN:   But that might just be a fact that my 
memory... I might – I just do not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  I think Mr Seleka will talk to you 
about the meeting of the 8 t h but at the end of that meeting, 
according to Mr Tsotsi and I think Mr Linnell, both of whom 
have testified before me, at the end of the meeting that the 
people concerned had with the President, the President 
said to Mr Tsotsi:   
 
You, Mr Tsotsi, will talk to the board about these 
issues and I will talk to the Minister.  That was the 8 t h.  
20 
And then on the 9 t h there was a meeting of the board and 
at that meeting, as I recall, Mr Tsotsi told the board about 
the need for an inquiry and I think he said he did tell them 
that he had been to a meeting with the President where 
this issue was discussed.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 100 of 331 
 
 
And 
it 
seems 
he 
did 
not 
tell 
them 
about 
suspensions, he just told them about the inquiry at that 
stage.  But apparently, there was some dissatisfaction on 
the part of some members of the board or the board or they 
had questions and they preferred that the Minister should 
be the one who comes to meet with the board and clarifies 
the position.   
 
And Mr Tsotsi says he communicated with you 
and I do not think he says he wrote to you.  I think he says 
he must have called you and arrangements were made for 
10 
you to then come and address the meeting on the 11 t h, the 
meeting of the board.   
 
That is what he has said in brief.  And then you 
came to the meeting.  Does that, more or less, accord 
...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Ja, perfectly.  It is perfectly plausible Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS BROWN:   And it is perfectly plausible that the 
President could have called me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you.  Thank you, Chair.  In 
that...  Then, Ms Brown, in the meeting of the 8 t h , which is 
attended by Mr Tsotsi in Durban, he says in his evidence 
that he is told by Ms Myeni that there should be an inquiry 
at Eskom because of Eskom’s financial stress and poor 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 101 of 331 
 
technical performance.   
 
She elaborated further to say, three executives 
should be suspended and according to Mr Tsotsi, she 
mentioned the names being Mr Montana, Mr Koko and 
Mr Dan Marokane.  Three executives to be suspended.  
And that is the message Mr Tsotsi comes out with from that 
meeting and on the request of the President has to take it 
to the board.   
 
So to the extent that the President might have 
spoken with you, can you recall whether this particular – 
10 
these particular factors were part of the conversation 
between you and the President? 
MS BROWN:   I cannot remember the President speaking 
to me about a suspension or step asides but I do remember 
that somewhere from – in fact, I was in Pretoria.  I 
remember I was in Pretoria and I think I could have...    
 
Mr Tsotsi and I could have had a conversation 
about me coming to the meeting on the telephone and that 
he is supporting the inquiry and I was, of course, happy for 
the inquiry with tight terms of reference.   
20 
 
It was the only thing that I had, tight terms of 
reference, short turnaround and we know we are going to 
be bashed by the media but at least we will know what to 
do.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 102 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   And I think it is in that context he then 
speaks about the... to this step aside.  I might...  You 
know, I have had a view on the liquidity matters throughout 
the morning.  I have spoken to you about the fact that 
Eskom had no money.  I mean, I am using just words.  So 
that is more likely where I could have heard it because I...   
 
Or in the presentation of whoever – Mr Tsotsi 
chairs the portfolio.  Look, I am also speculating Chair.  
You can hear that because I do not know absolutely for 
sure where I have heard about the suspensions of the 
10 
members of the executives.  The executives members, 
sorry.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   But having said that.  It could be either in 
the conversation when he invited me to the meeting, as he 
walks me to the meeting room, as he introduces the 
meeting.  That becomes part of the conversation.  It could 
be anywhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well...  Before you proceed Mr Seleka.  I 
just want you to double check whether it is accurate to say, 
20 
if I understood you correctly, that Mr Tsotsi said Ms Dudu 
Myeni mentioned the names of the three executives.  If it is 
so, that is fine.   
 
My understanding was that he said Ms Myeni 
mentioned to the portfolios because he was the only one 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 103 of 331 
 
who knew who occupied which portfolios and then he may 
have mentioned the names.  But if it is something that you 
have checked, then it is okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I am reading ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja...  No, that is alright then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So but the ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Can I just say something? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes. 
MS BROWN:   Dudu Myeni.  I did not know Dudu Myeni was 
10 
involved in this meeting.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   That I am absolutely clear of.  I thought it 
was 
a 
meeting 
between 
him 
and 
Mr 
Linnell 
and 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The President. 
MS BROWN:   ...the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the evidence that has been given 
before me by both Mr Tsotsi and Mr Linnell is that the 
people who attended that meeting were Ms Dudu Myeni, 
20 
Mr Tsotsi, Mr Linnell and Ms Dudu Myeni’s son but the son, 
they said, was not participating in the discussion but he 
was there.   
 
Mr 
Linnell 
has 
also 
said 
that 
there 
was 
somebody else who seems to have been a Mr Jabu 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 104 of 331 
 
Mashinghani ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...who was also present.  I do not know 
whether Mr Tsotsi was initially not sure whether he could 
remember ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that Mr Mashinghani was there but 
Mr Linnell was quite clear that he was there because he 
said he provided some documents relating to Eskom.  So 
those were the people that were there and both Mr Linnell 
10 
and Mr Tsotsi say, initially, these people had a meeting 
without the President and discussed the various issues.   
 
And then later on they moved into another room 
at the President’s Durban official residence and in another 
room then they had a meeting with the President.  So that 
is the evidence we have heard.   
 
And I think in a statement to the Portfolio 
Committee in Parliament, Ms Dudu Myeni also confirms 
that she was at that meeting, I think.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   She disputes that her son was there but 
she accepts that Mr Tsotsi was there and Mr Linnell was 
there.  And I do not know, I think she disputes that the 
President...  I do not know if she disputes that the 
President took part in the meeting.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 105 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She disputes the President taking part 
but she concedes the President was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And him to read(?) or something. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And she disputes the purpose of the 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So that is the just the gist of who 
was there.  Bu the question that Mr Seleka had asked you, 
which I think you may inadvertently not have responded to, 
10 
I think was whether to the extent that the President may 
have spoken to you between the 8 t h of March and the 11 t h, 
whether you have any recollection of him talking to you 
about the suspensions or stepping aside.  But you may 
have responded but somehow I thought you might not have 
responded.  You want to confirm what your position is? 
MS BROWN:   I am just not sure whether he spoke to me 
about suspensions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  No, it is fine. 
MS BROWN:   I do not know.  I cannot...  As I said earlier, 
20 
I have an idea that Mr Tsotsi spoke to me about 
suspensions ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   ...on the night when he called me because it 
was at night when he called me ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 106 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS BROWN:   ...to tell me that the board wanted to see 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if he called you on the 9 t h – if he 
called you to say the board wanted to see you, he must 
have called you then either on the 9 t h because the board 
had a meeting on that day or on the 10 t h.  So it would be 
one of those but it might not matter which one of those it 
was but it would have been one of those. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
MS BROWN:   Alright, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then Ms Brown, you agreed to come to 
the meeting on the 11 t h of March 2015 to meet with the 
board.  You were there with Ms Makholo, the acting DG.  
And when you arrived, the meeting started.  Two of the 
executives, after you had arrived – sometime after you had 
arrived, 
were 
asked 
to 
recuse 
themselves 
from 
the 
meeting, for a lack of a better word, and that was the CE 
20 
and the FD.  The board members seemed to recall that it 
been you and/or you Mr Tsotsi asking them to step out.  Do 
you recall what happened? 
MS BROWN:   I cannot recall.  I recall what happened 
before that meeting. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 107 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
MS BROWN:   Before the meeting started.  My immense 
irritation was in action around above that was in the 
room(?) but – and then other things, of course, as well and 
then...  I do not whether it is me or Mr Tsotsi who asked. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who asked them to go out...  Then the 
members said you spoke with them about the inquiry.  In 
the 
discussion 
that 
they 
say 
was 
in 
accordance 
or 
confirmed what Mr Tsotsi had told them on Monday, the 
9 t h  of March 2015. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe, what if we put it this way 
Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You addressed the meeting of the board.  
Is that correct? 
MS BROWN:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it correct that in your address to the 
board, you supported the idea of an inquiry into the affairs 
of Eskom? 
MS BROWN:   I think Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it correct that you also said that there 
were certain portfolios within Eskom that needed to be the 
subject of investigation? 
MS BROWN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 108 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   I clearly dealt with certain areas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   The only areas that were problematic in 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  When I ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   And I dealt with it.  The minutes is written – 
they are written.  I dealt with it in lay person’s terms. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  That is fine.  When I said 
portfolios. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That might not be the term you used but 
certain areas in the operations of Eskom that you were 
concerned about.  Is that correct? 
MS BROWN:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is it correct that there were four 
such areas that you were concerned about? 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   Two areas.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do you recall which ones they were? 
20 
MS BROWN:   I can list them in as I have put it to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS BROWN:   I was concerned about the financials, the 
cash flow of Eskom.  I was concerned about the costs 
overruns and under performance at Medupi and Kusile.  I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 109 of 331 
 
was 
concerned 
about 
load-shedding 
and 
that 
had 
everything to do with maintenance and all of that.  And 
there was a third area that I was concerned about that I 
cannot remember now.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS BROWN:   But that was – it was the costs overruns on 
Medupi and Kusile when they decided in 2007 involve 
these things – power stations which would have brought 
online 4800 megawatts.  It was now almost ten years later, 
almost ten years later.  Not a single unit has come online 
10 
or even been synchronised.  So.  And so that – and there 
was a fourth area ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   ...that I also...  I cannot remember the fourth 
area but it was the – those were the definite areas that 
Eskom was in crisis with as far as I was concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And those areas were, as far as 
you are concerned, were supposed to be the subject of the 
investigation that you were in support of.  Is that right? 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...what has been said is that you having 
identified the areas which were cause for concern to you, 
you also said that although you could not instruct the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 110 of 331 
 
board what to do, you said something to the effect that the 
heads of those areas which might be like portfolios as far 
as the evidence of Mr Tsotsi is concerned, the heads of 
those areas should step aside or step down.  He might not 
have used the word suspended, should be suspended but 
step aside or something like that.   
 
The understanding of the members of the board 
who have given evidence here is that you were saying that 
although you could not instruct the board what decisions to 
make, you thought that the heads of those areas should 
10 
not be there when the investigation took place.  Does that 
accord with your recollection of what you said? 
MS BROWN:   Not at all Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   In fact, I have been listening to quite a 
number of board members who says because I said that 
these were the areas that they had to focus on, that I in 
essence I told them that these are the people who are 
supposed to leave.  I heard a number of them say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
20 
MS BROWN:   I...  And look, I am sure the minutes and I 
am sure the investigators must have gone into whether I 
said it or not.  I do not think I would have said the heads of 
these things must be allowed to step aside.  What I did 
say, I think, was – and I saw it in Ms Molefe ...[indistinct – 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 111 of 331 
 
word cut out] doubt that she is probably right in what I 
said.  I said – and I – this must happen as quickly as 
possible, so it has the three months effect and what needs 
to – irrespective of whether you ask executives to step 
aside or not.  I do not recall it but I am sure if – as many 
people have said that that is how they understand it, that 
might be true but I must tell you that if they were asked to 
step aside or not would not have mattered to me because 
the thing that mattered to me was that there is – without 
interference from the executives because they were there 
10 
all the time, why are we still in load shedding, why was 
Medupi still behind schedule?  Because of that I did not 
want 
them 
involved 
in 
it 
necessarily 
but 
I 
did 
not 
necessarily want them to step aside or to – I just did not 
want – that is why I did not want any of the popular 
companies who normally do the work for Eskom to do the 
work 
for 
Eskom 
because 
we 
were 
not 
– 
we 
had 
investigation 
after 
investigation 
and 
we 
still 
had 
no 
success on it.  So, I mean, that for me was the issue. 
 
So those were the areas that mattered to me.  
20 
Whether the executives were asked to step aside of not I 
do not think I had a view either way but as long as they are 
not involved in it, that is all.  I just did not want them to be 
involved, I wanted a fresh eye on this.  In fact I use the 
term a fresh eye, a quick deep dive into what the problem 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 112 of 331 
 
is and how we can resolve it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I can say to you that, if I am not 
mistaken, almost every member of the board who has 
testified has said that you said you could not instruct the 
board what to do but that you did express I think a view 
that the executives who were heads of the – we called 
them portfolios when those board members were here 
giving evidence, the heads of those – the executives were 
heads of those portfolios, should step aside.  I think what 
you are saying is you are not certain whether you said that 
10 
but you think – you are inclined to think you would not 
have said that but you are not certain whether you said it 
or you did not say you said it.  So I am just saying almost 
every member of the board who has testified has confirmed 
along those lines but you have said you are not sure, you 
are inclined to think you would not have said it.  I think, Mr 
Seleka is shaking his head and maybe he thinks that I am 
not putting it as strongly as the board members put it 
before me.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You go ahead. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ms Brown, it is a little bit higher 
than the Chairperson is putting to you because some of 
them have said although you did not direct them to 
suspend the four executives, the minister felt that the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 113 of 331 
 
presence 
of 
the 
four 
executives 
might 
hinder 
the 
investigation.  One has said the seed of the suspensions 
was blunted by the minister and Mr – I am now reading 
from Dr Ngubane, he says: 
“After the meeting with the minister it was clear that 
government as shareholder of Eskom required the 
inquiry to proceed and that the four executives 
had…” 
And he put it in inverted commas. 
“…step aside whilst the inquiry was underway.” 
10 
Mr Khoza in his affidavit says: 
“It was clear that the minister wanted us to read 
between the lines.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I was about to say that, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Mr Khoza said – and it was in 
response to a question from me, said well, although the 
minister said he could not instruct the board, what are you 
saying, are you saying you could read between the lines 
that 
what 
she 
wanted 
namely 
that 
the 
executives 
20 
concerned should step aside or be suspended?  He said 
yes, we could read between the lines, that is what the 
minister wanted.  You might not be …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   I heard all of that, Chair.  I have heard all of 
that.  That is why I am saying to you I have heard all the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 114 of 331 
 
board members say that I said what you have said.  The 
issue for me, and I say it again, it did not matter if they 
were there or not.  I just – look, firstly, I did not know 
because I did not engage with those officials.  So I did not 
really know the officials except for the Group CEO who was 
the DG in my department before I left – before he left for 
Eskom.  So I knew him quite well.  Well, not well, but 
seven months at least.   
So, Chair, I have heard all the board members say 
that the minister said this and the minister said that.  I can 
10 
– you know, I concede that as long they were not involved 
in the inquiry, I can concede either way.  I mean, I do not 
know what you would like me to concede to at this point 
because I – if you say to me Ms Brown, please concede 
that 
you 
instructed 
the 
board 
to 
suspend 
the 
four 
executives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, we …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   What are you asking to accede to? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, nobody is asking you to concede 
to anything. 
20 
MS BROWN:   I think I must go into law after this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nobody is asking you to concede 
anything, all we want is for you to just tell me truthfully 
and honestly what you remember to have happened, so – 
and the reason why Mr Seleka …[intervenes] 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 115 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   It is exactly what I said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The reason why Mr Seleka wanted to 
refer to the specific members of the board was that he 
wanted you to have a clear picture that they seemed to be 
very clear in their minds, in their minds, what you said and 
I 
think, 
you 
know, 
as 
you 
might 
recall, 
Mr 
Tsotsi 
subsequently had tension with the board.  But on this, both 
Mr Tsotsi and the board, the other board members, 
appeared to be on the same page.  But I guess that you 
are not able to say anything more than that, you do not – 
10 
you say you do not recall for sure but I think you say you 
may have said so. 
MS BROWN:   I may have – I gave the – I can tell you for 
absolutely sure that the areas I outlined, that would also 
be the areas of the inquiry.  Did I want the board – the 
executives involved in it?  I do not think I had an express 
view either way.  If they were there, as long as they were 
not involved in the investigation, that would be fine.  If 
they were involved in the investigation it would not serve 
us – I do not think it would have served us well.  So did I 
20 
want them to step aside?  Not necessarily.  If they stayed 
on it would have been fine, if they were asked to step 
aside for three months in the interest of stabilising the 
company, that would probably also have been something I 
could – I could have alluded to because nobody says I said 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 116 of 331 
 
– because I listened to all of them too, nobody said I said 
that they must step aside for three months because that 
was exactly the duration of the period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
MS BROWN:   That the inquiry was going to happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think what is important to 
highlight, Ms Brown, in regard to what you say and what 
the board members say is that they are quite clear in their 
evidence, I think all of them, if I am mistaken, who have 
given evidence, that whatever you said, it was clear that 
10 
you 
wanted 
– 
you 
wished 
to 
have 
the 
executives 
suspended.  I am saying you wished but maybe Mr Seleka 
will say you wanted the executives to be suspended.  They 
are all quite clear on that.  There is no contradiction 
among themselves.  You say you may have said but you 
also say you did not want them to step aside as long as 
they did not interfere but they may – I think there is 
contradiction between what you say when you say you did 
not want them to step aside, there is contradiction between 
what you say and what the various board members say 
20 
because they are quite clear but I am just highlighting that 
so that you know what the difference is between you and 
the board members.  They are quite clear that is what you 
wanted, you are saying that is not necessarily what you 
wanted as long as they did not interfere, the executives.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 117 of 331 
 
Okay, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ja, she wants to comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, did you want to say something, Ms 
Brown, in response? 
MS BROWN:   No, no, I – no, I think it is something you 
will have to adjudicate, Chair, when you make your 
recommendations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is right.  Well, that was 
the point why I am highlighting it so that you can see, ja. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Brown, then there is evidence that 
as you were ending your discussion with the board – and 
sorry, I am reminded, I – and you have already said about 
your involvement in the operations, you accept that was 
wrong, so I am not going there, I want to deal with this 
aspect, that you were telling the board you must make the 
decision or hang around.  Do you remember that? 
MS BROWN:   I find it quite an odd thing that they say that 
because I normally just leave but I do not know why I 
20 
would have hung around to wait for them to make decisions 
and why it was so urgent because if – I mean, I think all I 
needed was an agreement from the board that they would 
have an inquiry, that we were going to come to the end of 
load shedding, that is all I wanted.  So I am not sure – I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 118 of 331 
 
really – my habit is never to hang around because I do not 
want to talk to the boards individually, board members 
individually and it is not because I do not like them but 
because a new inquiry happens and they will say while I 
was having coffee with the minister she told me I have got 
to wear a gold shoe and that will be law.  So I try never to 
hang around and I do not know why I hung around that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, my understanding is that one or 
more of the witnesses said that you said something to the 
effect that you would hang around so that if they needed 
10 
guidance you would be at hand, as it were, and it is not 
just the board members who said that, if I recall correctly, I 
think your own acting DG said exactly that as well, said 
that is what you said and I think she said, if I am not 
mistaken, you went to have coffee or something in the 
vicinity and she did not want to hang around – that is not 
the term she used to describe what she did not want to do 
but she did not want to stay because she said she had a 
lot of work, she left you and I think went back to the office 
but you remained behind because you had said to the 
20 
board you would hang around if they needed you.  Mr 
Seleka, is my recollection correct on this? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is correct, Chair, we need to add, 
the hanging around actually was at Eskom itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, at Eskom, ja, ja. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 119 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was saying in the vicinity of the venue 
of the board meeting. 
MS BROWN:   I have no reason to deny – to doubt that 
they have said it, I do not know why I would hang around 
but if they said it then I probably did hang around.  Chair, I 
genuinely do not know why I would hang around if they had 
any more questions unless somebody said in the meeting 
and completely forgot about it that can you please just 
hang around so that we can discuss it in case we need – 
10 
and they only person who could have said that would have 
been the Chair to me but if he says he did not say it, I 
cannot recall that I was hanging around.  I mean, I have 
other portfolios too, so I actually do not know what to say 
to you.  I can just say that I do not remember whether I 
hung around and if I did hang around, did something come 
and walk me out to my car?  I cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  The other intriguing 
thing, Ms Brown, is that on the 10 March 2015 according to 
20 
the evidence of Ms Suzanne Daniels to the Commission, is 
that she was called by Mr Koko to Melrose Arch into a 
meeting with Mr Koko and Mr Salim Essa.  In that meeting 
Mr Salim Essa tells her – introducing himself as Minister 
Lynne Brown’s adviser, that – now I am skipping some of 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 120 of 331 
 
the things because some of the questions relate to what is 
the process to suspend executives at Eskom but ultimately 
the point is, the message is conveyed to her that four 
executives are going to be suspended.  The names are 
given, including the FD, including Mr Koko but that Mr 
Koko will return but the other three would not.  Four names 
are given to her, four executives will be suspended.  This 
is not the same as what Mr Tsotsi was told in Durban.  The 
FD was not mentioned to Mr Tsotsi but it is surprising that 
when you come to the board on the 11 t h you were 
10 
concerned with four areas and ultimately it is these four 
individuals who get suspended as opposed to the three 
that were mentioned in the discussion with the President.  
Was this a coincidence. 
MS BROWN:   I have always held a view from the 
beginning of my conversation or my – since we were 
speaking about whether or not Eskom was liquid or a 
going-concern or whether Eskom was going to be bankrupt, 
I have always held a view that finance would be part of the 
group of areas that would be areas that we have to focus 
20 
on.  So, look, I actually personally – if somebody came to 
tell me that Mr Essa was my adviser, I would have done 
exactly what I did to other people who also played 
themselves off as my adviser, I write to the companies, I 
tell that these people are not my advisers and then I go – 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 121 of 331 
 
my department – not my department, my office would go 
and lay a charge against them at the intelligence officers 
so that if he was to say that.  Ms Suzanne Daniels has 
always been part of the company when she came to my 
meetings where my officials were present and my advisers 
so I do not know what you want me to say any further to 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe let us – let me put it this 
way.  There is a version, as Mr Seleka has told you, by Ms 
Daniels but what he did not tell you is that also by Mr 
10 
Abram Masango both of whom say at different times they 
were called by Mr Koko to come to Melrose Arch and then 
when they came there, they came into an office where they 
had a meeting with Mr Koko and Mr Salim Essa and each 
one of them says they were told in that meeting something 
they had not known before, namely that certain executives 
were going to be suspended at Eskom and four names were 
given of the executives and those were the executives who 
ultimately got suspended the following day.   
So one, the question that arises is apart from the 
20 
fact that it was the people who had been at the Durban 
meeting that had discussed the possible suspension of 
certain executives, Mr Tsotsi, who is the only board 
member who had attended the Durban meeting, had not yet 
told the board about the idea of suspensions, he only told 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 122 of 331 
 
them on the – at the meeting of the 11 t h, as I understand 
his evidence.   
So the question arises, if that version is true, 
namely that such meetings did take place at Melrose Arch  
and Mr Koko and Mr Essa had told Ms Daniels and Mr 
Masango in different meetings that there were going to be 
suspensions of these executives, how is it possible that 
somebody from outside of Eskom, Mr Salim Essa, was 
getting – had this knowledge and was getting involved in 
who 
should 
be 
suspended 
and 
who 
should 
not 
be 
10 
suspended 
and 
who 
should 
come 
back 
after 
the 
suspensions and who should not come back at Eskom.  
That is the one part. 
The second part is simply the one that also Mr 
Seleka mentions that according to Ms Daniels, Mr Salim 
Essa, introduced himself as your adviser. 
The third part is that at the Durban meeting, the two 
people who attended that meeting and who have testified, 
namely Mr Tsotsi and Mr Linnell, they all agreed that the 
financial director of that portfolio was not included among 
20 
the portfolios of areas that were to be investigated through 
the inquiry and therefore, the suspensions or stepping 
aside that was discussed at the Durban meeting did not 
include the financial director also stepping aside, so – but 
when you came to the board meeting on the morning of the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 123 of 331 
 
11 t h, you talked about four areas that needed to be 
investigated and it included the area or portfolio of the 
financial director.  So that is where some of the issues are 
to say what was happening here? 
So you might be able to say I can tell you or you 
might say look, I cannot tell you but that I came with four 
areas including the financial director, I knew nothing about 
the Durban meeting but that is what happened.  
So but that is one of the areas.  I mean, I will have 
to decide whether this version that there was a meeting or 
10 
these two meetings at Melrose Arch, whether it is true or 
not and that what is alleged to have been said in those 
meetings was said and if I find that those things were said, 
it will be quite something to say, how come at the Durban 
meeting the financial director is not included as one of 
those to be suspended but the minister comes on the 11 t h 
and she includes her portfolio.   
Maybe it is a coincidence, maybe it is not but I have 
to apply my mind to it.  So, Mr Seleka just wanted you to 
say what you might be able to say about this. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Your turn, Ms Brown? 
MS BROWN:   Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   I have never missed a chance to talk.  Just 
one part of the version that I think I must refute entirely, 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 124 of 331 
 
that Mr Salim Essa is not – was not an adviser of mine, is 
not an adviser of mine and I, other than having shaken his 
hand at some gathering somewhere, do not know the 
fellow. 
 
The 
second 
point 
is, 
I 
think 
the 
strongest 
recollection I might have about how finance is added on 
can only be me because I seem to be the only one in all of 
the conspiracies, all of the gatherings, all of the meetings,  
who believed that Eskom was in a financial crisis.  So I 
think in my conversation with Mr Tsotsi when he says to me 
10 
we want to have a meeting with you tomorrow because of 
the following things because I would not be going to a 
meeting if I do not know what the following things are.  In 
that meeting I could even have told Mr Tsotsi – this is just 
another version, Chair, it is not that I have done it, Mr 
Tsotsi, but what about finances?  Because at this stage it 
seems that nobody else thought that we had a financial 
crisis in Eskom except to me, the Minister.  So that is my  - 
that is the only thing I can say to you about this matter, 
Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe I can also just say that it 
would appear that according to the evidence of a number 
of the board members and board members who testified,  it 
would 
appear 
that 
when 
the 
meeting 
of 
the 
board 
deliberated on the suspensions after you had left the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 125 of 331 
 
meeting with them, a number of them were opposed to the 
idea of the suspension of the financial director.  One of 
them was giving evidence here yesterday, Mr Pamensky, he 
said he was strongly opposed to that.  Mr Tsotsi himself 
said he was strongly opposed to that.  I do not know if 
there are others who said they were opposed to it but the 
impression I got was that those who may have been 
opposed to it, may have ultimately not pursued their 
opposition further than they did because the minister 
included the financial director or the financial director ’s 
10 
portfolio among those who should step aside or should be 
investigated.  That is the impression I had.  But also 
yesterday Mr Pamensky said no, no, no, no, the decision of 
the board after the minister had left was that only three 
executives should be suspended and they ...[indistinct – 
word cut out] Financial Director, that was his evidence 
yesterday.  So I am just mentioning this so that you have 
an idea of what happened, according to ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  But Chair, that is interesting.  If a board 
member says that the board made a decision that only 
20 
three people were going to be suspended, why was that 
decision not sent through to me?  Look, I did write a 
strongly worded letter to them, because remember the 
decision of the board is actually the deciding decision. 
 
Whether the minister or the president or anybody 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 126 of 331 
 
instructs them, the decision remains the decision of the 
board.  So I am surprised that the board when it is 
characterised as being a Gupta board, it is one matter.  If 
it is characterised as not carrying through a decision as 
important as the one that they, that you are now raising 
with me, that they cannot carry that decision through?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  So why did the board succumb to the 
minister ’s power? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, the ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS BROWN:  It is just an interesting, it is an interesting 
issue that I would like, I am just putting on the table.  I 
have already said to you Chair, what my version is of it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no no that is fine.  
MS BROWN:  And ja, but I just think that I think that is an 
interesting point.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I must tell you that if the board 
members who testified did not say so expressly, certainly 
my impression is that the evidence they have given here is 
to the effect that they were not prepared to make a 
20 
decision on the issue of the inquiry on the 9 t h, at the 
meeting of the 9 t h of March when their own Chairperson, Mr 
Tsotsi was proposing that they should make a decision to 
say there should be an inquiry, and there is, and what they 
insisted on in effect seemed to me to sound like we want to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 127 of 331 
 
hear it from the minister.  
 
That is why you were then called to come and 
address them, and the evidence at least of some of the 
board 
members 
before 
me, 
gave 
me 
a 
very 
clear 
impression that after you had spoken, they felt comfortable 
going along with this proposal of Mr Tsotsi which he had 
told them about on the 9 t h, now that they knew that the 
minister was supportive of this idea of an inquiry?   
 
Mr Seleka, you might indicate whether you had the 
same impression of the evidence.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no that is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, it comes across quite clearly that 
they wanted to hear what the minister had to say and once 
the minister had said okay, this is he had addressed them, 
they seemed at least a lot of those who testified, this 
suggests that they, then they were comfortable because 
then they knew Mr Tsotsi was not misleading them.  
 
I am putting this in my own words.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What do you say about that? 
20 
MS BROWN:  Chair, I think I have more to say.  I just think 
that if you are the board, you are in charge of your 
company and you know, I if there is some things that I wish 
I did not do, then this is one of them.  Not going to that 
board meeting, because they are responsible for running 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 128 of 331 
 
the company. 
 
I am responsible for oversight over the running of 
that company.  The fact that they have to all me in because 
Mr Tsotsi met with the president at the time and they 
therefore did not want to believe him, they then call me in, 
is something that really, really it is really something that I 
wish I did not do at the time.  
 
I wish I never went to that meeting, because if I did 
not go to that meeting, I would not be in this position to 
make the decision about whether or not and why would 
10 
they call me to a meeting that they could make a decision 
on by themselves? 
 
But anyway, that is just my point on this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it might raise a certain point and 
maybe when you said this is interesting, relating to them 
wanting confirmation from you or something like that, 
maybe this is what you had in mind.  It may be raising the 
question of whether the board that Eskom had, had enough 
independence.  
 
Whether they had what it would take to make 
20 
decisions that fall within their purview on their own, and 
without wanting to know whether the minister would 
approve of their decision or not, or would be happy about 
that decision or not.  
 
It might be raising that issue and maybe that is in 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 129 of 331 
 
part what you may have been, you may have had in mind 
when you said it is interesting why they would not make a 
decision and call you. 
MS BROWN:  You know Chair, I do not know why they did 
not make the decision themselves, but having said that I 
appointed  the board of very competent board members.  
They themselves fell under a terrible spell of having been 
called a Gupta board, and nothing they did they did right 
and that whole, I think it was Mr Molefe who said having 
moved from, having sold optimum mine together was the 
10 
way to get us all classified as Gupta people.  
 
But that is a side Chair, they would ... they were of 
the most equipped, I had the Chairperson of the institute of 
directors in South Africa.  I had electrical engineers in that 
board.  I have had in that board lawyers, CA’s, just of the 
most highly educated and talented people on the board.  
 
It is, I find it if I were to go on a conspiracy I find it 
interesting myself.  So that is where I, I have nothing more 
to say on the 11 t h March meeting Chair.  That is my view.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MS BROWN:  But either way ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I just wanted the inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just to the extent Ms 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 130 of 331 
 
Brown that you say this is one meeting you should not 
have attended, you regret attending it.  Ms Mkolo says that 
she was hinting to this issue during the meeting that the 
minister should go because these are operational issues 
that the board should decide.  
 
We should not be here.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And she said ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  She said you were agreeing with her on 
that point, but you were not leaving the meeting.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I was not leaving the meeting for no other 
conspiratorial reason other than the fact that I have not 
seen the board in a long, long time.  the last time I saw 
them were when we had an AGM and the induction and the 
board was feeling, this is what Mr Tsotsi told me.   
 
The board was feeling that they were having grave 
difficulties with being in a way shut out by the war room 
and so I wanted to, that is one of the reasons I wanted to 
be there, so that I could get them involved in and get them 
20 
to understand what is happening.  
 
Like the people is saying we were in a crisis.  We 
remained in a crisis where ever we had whatever war room, 
whatever structures we had in place, whoever we had in 
place.  we were in a crisis and that is why I went to the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 131 of 331 
 
meeting, but you know, Ms ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mokolo. 
MS BROWN:  She did send me a message ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  Quite late in the, after the, within the 
meeting.  Not in the beginning of the meeting, not in the 
middle of the meeting, but at the end of the meeting.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Ja, there was a question I had, 
now it is missing.  Oh, this is another thing I need to add 
please.  At the meeting at Melrose Arch, Ms Daniels says 
10 
she was told by Mr Essa that he wants an independent firm 
to conduct an inquiry, and I have heard you earlier say you 
also wanted a fresh eye, an independent person who did 
not have anything to deal with Eskom prior to that, to 
conduct this investigation. 
MS BROWN:  I cannot answer that Chair.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I do not know if I believe anything anyone 
says.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
20 
MS BROWN:  So I cannot answer it.  I mean, I can also say 
to you that somebody told me that so and so did A, B and 
C.  I do not have, I do not want to do that.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I do not know if it is true that Ms 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 132 of 331 
 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I know that I said it.  I read it in the press 
statement that I said it.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Or not I said it, but the press statement 
reads that we wanted a fresh eye or not a fresh eye, we 
wanted a dependent, not somebody who worked with 
Eskom before and so forth. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, what ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS BROWN:  Not because I thought it up but because it 
came up out of a conversation within the meeting.  So 
maybe somebody else raised the fact that if we are going 
to do this investigation, because remember we were under 
a lot of, we were under a lot of pressure, and another 
investigation was just not going to fly. 
 
So when we had the press conference, we I mean 
just putting that into the public was enough to get the 
public very, very irritated.  So I mean, I cannot tell you 
what anybody said about whether it is true or not.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  I do not know.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no my point is ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  I wish I knew.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, now I am raising a different point 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 133 of 331 
 
with you.  The point  is there seems to have been not 
similarities, but the same idea or view.  Idea coming from 
the meeting with Mr Salim Essa and ultimately what you 
proposed to the board, which is four people would step 
aside, that is number one, it is the same thing.  
 
Number two is that there should be this independent 
firm that should conduct the inquiry.  Now those two 
contrasting with what Mr Linnell had in mind, and was 
advising the president to do and Mr Tsotsi.  Mr Linnell he 
was given three names, and Mr Tsotsi, but on the second 
10 
point is this.  
 
He was proposing terms of reference that would 
include a retired judge to conduct an inquiry, an accounting 
or auditing firm and a law firm.  Which is nowhere close to 
what you had in mind.  Or what you had in mind seems to 
have been the same ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  As what Essa had in mind. 
MS BROWN:  I did not have in mind any specific, I did not 
think oh this is how it should be, or that is how it should 
20 
be.  I just thought the right thing to do would be to have an 
inquiry.  I agreed with my  principle that the inquiry was 
something that would happen.  
 
I 
do 
not 
remember 
the 
issues 
around 
the 
suspension of the four people.  I do not know if I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 134 of 331 
 
particularly, if one person gives that, their view and I give 
another view, whether which view carries.  So I mean, all I 
am saying is that that was my view.  
 
The fact that there should be an independent 
inquiry is a view that I held very strongly.  That it cannot 
be somebody who has worked in Eskom before because we 
have had enough inquiries before.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  I have the minutes of your 
meeting with the board, just to mention this to you.  You 
would have seen the minutes of the 11 t h.  There was no 
10 
audio recording of the meeting.  That is what the board 
members have said, but during the discussion according to 
the minutes, where you were present, during the discussion 
following the questions, it was clarified as follows: 
 
“The board confirm that a letter had been sent 
to the minister and the minister stated that she 
would look at it, and then the executive who 
are responsible for areas which will be the 
focus of the investigation, must step aside for 
the duration of the inquiry in order to, in order 
20 
not to impede it.” 
 
So that is what is captured in the minutes.   
MS BROWN:  Is that what I say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well, they say during the discussion 
following the questions ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 135 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  No, no is that what I say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No, they do not say you said it.  
MS BROWN:  Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  They are saying in the discussions 
following questions, this was clarified.  
MS BROWN:  By who? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The minute taker does not specify who. 
MS BROWN:  You see Chair, that is the point I am making.  
The assumption is that the person who clarifies is me.  The 
person who, I mean clarified by who? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Ms Brown, as I understand it, what 
Mr Seleka is doing, he is aware of course what your 
version is on whether you said at the meeting with the 
board the executives should step aside or not.  he is aware 
of your version.  
 
What he had not done earlier, which he is doing I 
think for the sake of completeness, is to refer you to the 
minutes to say what is reflected in the minutes.  He is not 
20 
saying that was reflected in the minutes that you are the 
one who said the executive must step aside, but he is 
saying as I understand it, the minutes that relate to your 
meeting with the board reflects that at that meeting it was 
said that the executives concerned should step aside.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 136 of 331 
 
 
So that is all he is saying.  He is not saying the 
minutes say you said.  
MS BROWN:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MS BROWN:  But Chair, what surprises me, that every 
single meeting is recorded by Eskom.  Why did they not 
record this one?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I guess Mr Seleka will not know 
either. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We do not know. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you see to the extent that they did 
not record this one, I can tell you that there are some 
meetings where I think there are audio recordings, but 
there are some meeting, maybe one, maybe two, where 
part of the meeting is not recorded, and then or we do not 
have the recording, the transcript but everyone agrees that 
when you listen to the audio where it starts, it is not where 
the meeting started, the discussion started.  
 
There was a discussion prior to this point, but that 
part of the discussion is not covered in the audio.  
20 
MS BROWN:  I find it extremely odd, because I know Chair 
that Eskom records all its meetings.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS BROWN:  And so I find it really, really strange that 
Eskom records its meetings.  A narrative is created and I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 137 of 331 
 
am not saying the commission is creating this narrative.  A 
narrative 
is 
created. 
 
Eskom, 
that 
thing 
disappears 
completely. 
 
There is no recording of that, my speaking in the 
meeting and everybody remembers seven years later that 
the only person that actually thought there was a liquidity 
crisis was actually the minister.  The rest of us did not.  so 
I just find it odd. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  But Chair, I am in your hands again. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no I understand.  the most or an 
important 
part 
of 
the 
exercise 
is 
that 
you 
get 
an 
opportunity to say exactly what you are saying you know, 
this is odd.  You might not be able to say whether it is right 
or wrong, correct of not, but you say your understanding is 
that Eskom would record all meetings. 
MS BROWN:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is strange that this one was not 
recorded, you know.  So ja.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, Chair and I am going to move on but 
20 
I have a recollection Ms Brown and I think this was Dr 
Ngubane and Mr Tsotsi.  This also came out when Ms 
Benita Klein was testifying, that as they were debating 
whether or not you wanted the FD also to be part of the 
persons to step aside, Dr Ngubane stepped out to give you 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 138 of 331 
 
a call.   
 
To confirm with you whether in fact you wanted the 
FD and came back to tell them yes, the FD should also be 
included on the list.  Do you have any recollection of Dr 
Ngubane phoning you? 
MS BROWN:  I do not have a recollection of Dr Ngubane 
phoning me and saying that I should.  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have a recollection ...[intervenes]  
MS BROWN:  Was I not just in the coffee shop at the time?  
Why did he not just walk to the coffee shop?  Why did he 
10 
phone me?  I thought I was sitting in the coffee shop 
somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, my understanding is that after you 
had left the board meeting to go, to hang around as they 
said or to go to the coffee shop, the board continued with 
its meeting for a certain period of time and then its 
meeting ended, and then another meeting I think of the 
PMG committee was to start after the board meeting.  
 
That committee was given a mandate to do certain 
things about the suspensions if I am not mistaken, to take 
20 
the matter forward and my understanding is that what Mr 
Seleka is talking about, is something that was said to have 
happened during the PMG committee meeting and by that 
time it is possible that you might have left because the 
board meeting had ended, even if you had been hanging 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 139 of 331 
 
around for some time.  
 
So the understanding from the evidence is that 
when the board meeting, when the PMG committee meeting 
was carrying on in the afternoon, or after the board 
meeting, Dr Ngubane went out according to one of the 
witnesses, went out and came back and said he had 
spoken to you on the phone and said what Mr Seleka has 
said.  
 
But I also wanted to say my recollection is that 
when he gave evidence before me, Dr Ngubane may have 
10 
admitted having called you quite a few times on that day.  
So I do not know whether you have any recollection of that.  
MS BROWN:  I have no recollection.  The only recollection 
I have is that the Chairs of the boards called me regularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS BROWN:  But I do not have a recollection of him calling 
me on that day and me saying please fire the FD. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja okay.  Maybe we should have an 
adjournment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka, we are at four o’clock.  Let us 
take a short adjournment, ten minutes adjournment.  Maybe 
to the extent that everybody might wish to know, I think 
that we will continue at least until five maybe, because I 
am meant to have an evening session with other witnesses 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 140 of 331 
 
who will testify during the evening session. 
 
So I think we will continue with Ms Brown’s 
evidence maybe at least until five.  I thought I must just 
mention that so that everybody we are all on the same 
page in terms of how far we might go.  It may well be that 
by then we will have finished.  
 
It may well be that we will not have finished.  If we 
have not finished by then, we will talk when we come to 
that point, as to the way forward.   
MS BROWN:  Thank you Chair.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you, let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Brown we are proceeding. 
MS BROWN:   Yes, Chair I am here. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you Ms Brown.   Just the Mr 
Salim Essa factor, you know when they – when I am 
leading to something and I ask in regard to Mr Tsotsi’s 
evidence again before the Commission Mr Salim Essa we 
20 
understand from another witness, totally unrelated to your 
position, that he also gets to be introduced as an advisor 
to a particular minister, the minister at the time was of the 
DMR.  This must be a de facto advisor as opposed to de 
jure advisor. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 141 of 331 
 
 
But then you have when the composition of the sub-
committees of the Boards is to be made, Ms Brown, the 
version of Mr Tsotsi in regard to the interaction between 
you and him – and for this reason I’ve asked my learned 
friend to tell you to go to page 12 – 13 of Eskom Bundle 7, 
that’s where you find emails exchanged between you and 
Mr Tsotsi.  On the electronic copy you will have to type 
page 1215 to get to page 1213. 
MS BROWN:   Okay, I…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You on that page? 
10 
MS BROWN:   So, I am in – then in an extraordinary Board 
meeting I have to get to 12, you say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   Page 12? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1215…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   and is that the red 12? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, always the black. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s Bundle 7 – Eskom Bundle 7, page 
1215, is that right Mr…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 1213…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, then she has to got to go two pages. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1215. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, because that’s the document 
which she had as 1213, on the hardcopy is on 1215 on the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 142 of 331 
 
soft copy. 
MS BROWN:   What’s the heading of what you want me to 
read, Advocate? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just ask the question again? 
MS BROWN:   What’s the heading you want me to read? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, it’s an email…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   Because…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s an email from Mr Zola Tsotsi to 
yourself and the 16 t h of December…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   The 16 t h of December? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, 2014. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got it? 
MS BROWN:   The one that I don’t respond to? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t know about that but if it’s 16 
December 2014 at 2h08 in the afternoon from Mr Zola 
Tsotsi to you and it says, Dear Minister, that’s the right 
one, does it say that is that a yes? 
MS BROWN:   Look I can’t get it on my – I have copies of 
the letter because I printed this letter and I sent it to my 
20 
legal advisor. So, just give me the page – I am in Bundle 7. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay 1215. 
MS BROWN:   Oh, 1215, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MS BROWN:   Thank you, “I trust you are well”, yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 143 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that’s correct, that’s the one.  So, 
Ms Brown let me give you Mr Tsotsi’s version, I know you 
already know it. 
MS BROWN:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Mr Tsotsi communicates with you 
in regard to the composition position of the sub-committees 
he says, he was preparing the list that he would provide to 
you, in the course of that he receives a list from Mr Salim 
Essa for the composition of the sub-committees.  He had 
initially said to the Commission in an affidavit that he 
10 
ignored that list and gave you his own list.  He had 
subsequently come back to correct that version and he 
says, what we are looking at now on page 1213 of Eskom 
Bundle 7, is in fact, the composition that was given to him 
by Mr Salim Essa which he then sent to you…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I could add this Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   Is that the 28 t h of January? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, stick to the email of 16 December 
for now, just stick with that, I think Mr Seleka may have 
20 
given you a longer version, let’s keep it manageable, go 
back to 1215. 
MS BROWN:   I am on page 1215. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  What Mr Tsotsi said is 
that he was going to send you his proposed composition of 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 144 of 331 
 
the committees of the Board but before he could send you 
those or before he could finalise his composition of how 
the committees of the Board should be composed, he 
received an email from Mr Salim Essa with a composition 
of how the different committees of the Board should be 
composed and he said, Mr Salim Essa said to him he 
should present that composition from Mr Salim Essa to you 
as his own proposed composition, you understand so far? 
MS BROWN:   I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, and it’s not about English, I 
10 
just want…[intervenes]. 
MS BROWN:   I’m not going to live that one down, I can 
tell you. [Laughter]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to make sure that I don’t tell 
you a long story, by the time I ask you to say something 
you have forgotten some of the things.  That’s what he 
says but then he says, he said to me previously, that is Mr 
Tsotsi, that he had decided to ignore Mr Salim Essa’s 
opposed composition of the committees but when he 
testified the last time, he did say, he did send to you the 
20 
composition of the various committees of the Board, as 
suggested by Mr Salim Essa.  It would seem that he did not 
send, to you, the email from Mr Salim Essa but formulated 
and email which is this one, on page 1215 on your side, 
page 1213 on the hard copy and said what he said and 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 145 of 331 
 
then gave you the list of names under different committees 
as they appear here but he says, those lists were Mr Salim 
Essa’s list not his and he concedes that in the email he 
presented them as his and not as Mr Salim Essa’s, what do 
you have to say about that? 
MS BROWN:   Well, Chair, I’d seen this, and I’ve actually 
sent it to – when I went through my IPAD I saw the list that 
he sent to me and I – none of these list’s matter unless it 
comes as a resolution of the Board.  So, I say to him, I 
don’t respond on the 16 t h of December, now I can’t 
10 
remember why I don’t respond on the 16 t h of December but 
I can only imagine that it’s a public holiday and all public 
representatives are probably speaking at some function or 
the other, I have my IPAD with me because all my 
speeches are on it and I open his thing and I don’t 
remember to go back to it because I always respond to 
people’s emails, that’s the only thing I can remember but 
none of these lists really matter if it doesn’t go – and I say 
this to him, he writes that there are small changes on the 
Board, I write back to him and I say, please put this – I 
20 
then send it to all my staff the 28 t h of January list.  The 
16 t h I don’t respond to him, the 28 t h of January I say, put 
this on a letterhead and formulise it through the structure 
of my department because I can’t, on the face of it, make a 
decision about any lists.  I don’t know the people, I don’t 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 146 of 331 
 
know, looking at the lists, the expertise, the capabilities, 
the technicalities of any of it, go through the legal and 
governance of it.  So, I say, send it formally, I then send 
that list that he sends me, I send it to Mr Tsotsi – I send 
that response to Mr Tsotsi, to Matsietsi Mokholo, to my real 
special advisor Brendan Roberts and to my office, Ken 
Davids.  She, to put it through the registry, Brendan to look 
at it and to know that he’s got to account for it, Matsietsi 
so that she can put it through the legal and governance 
unit, because it doesn’t matter to me.  I am responsible for 
10 
two – I don’t know if they are – those two statutory 
committees and it’s only to do with skill and capacity.  I am 
responsible to look at – to note for the rest of the 
committees.  So, I am not sure why it’s an issue other than 
the fact that he has not – he has actually given me a list 
from somebody from outside, that’s the only issue for me.  
Any list that comes from anywhere, has to go through to 
the department so that they can actually process that list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Chair.  Your – Ms Brown your 
20 
email that you have taken us to, I think it is the email of 
the 28 t h of January 2015. 
MS BROWN:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I’ve considered that email against what 
you say in your affidavit.  The email reads, 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 147 of 331 
 
“Dear Mr Tsotsi,  thank you for the email below 
regarding the composition of Board committees.  
Given that this is a newly appointed Board, it is my 
responsibility 
as 
shareholder 
representative 
to 
formally 
consider 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
committees”, 
 
And I mention that specifically because it relates to, 
not just what you say are the two committees in respect of 
which you have legal responsibility for their appointment 
which is Audit and Risk and Social and Ethics Committee, 
10 
but this seems to extend to all the committees.  Can you 
explain to the Chairperson why you casted your interest 
that wide…[intervenes]?   
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Seleka that I’m interrupting 
you again but it may be that it’s going to tie in certain 
issues properly if we deal with Mr Tsotsi’s email of 26 
January 2015 to Ms Brown before we come to hers to him 
on 28 January because in Mr Tsotsi’s email of 26 January 
which appears on page 1215 on the hardcopy which I 
guess on Ms Brown’s electronic copy will be 1217, in that 
20 
email of 26 January which is before Ms Brown sends hers 
off on 28 January Mr Tsotsi says, 
“Please 
find 
the 
revised 
Board 
sub-committee 
deployment as follows”, 
 
And 
he 
gives 
the 
composition 
of 
various 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 148 of 331 
 
committees. Now, his version, if I recall correctly was that, 
initially he sent you a composition as reflected in the email 
of the 16 t h of December and then later on, which was not 
his composition but Mr Salim Essa’s composition but then 
later on, sent his own composition to you.  Now I don’t 
remember whether, when he was giving evidence, we found 
that his composition in his email of 26 January is the same 
as Salim Essa’s composition or whether it was not but to 
the extent that it might be different, it would represent 
according to him, his own composition that he sent to you 
10 
as opposed to Salim Essa’s composition that he had sent 
to you on the 16 t h of December.  So, I just want to check 
whether you remember having received from him first the 
email of the 16 t h of December and later and before you go 
respond, later receiving his email of the 26 t h of January 
whereafter you then responded by way of your email of 28 t h 
of 
January, 
whether 
that’s 
your 
recollection 
of 
the 
sequence. 
MS BROWN:  That is my recollection but Chair, hear this, 
so you see, this thing has bothered me a lot and you know 
20 
I’m retired now.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you tired? 
MS BROWN:   I’m retired – well I’m also tired, I’m very 
tired now but…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I’m just alive to …[intervenes] 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 149 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:   I can do a lot of research on my own and the 
issue – so I do receive a letter from Mr Tsotsi on the 16 t h 
of December which I don’t respond to, for some odd reason 
but the thing I’m saying is, it was a public holiday, and I 
was probably in m constituency doing constituency work in 
Ritchie in the Northern Cape…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He may have said you were on holiday, 
I’m not sure, he may have said that you were on holiday if 
I’m not mistaken. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that’s correct. 
10 
MS BROWN:   I wasn’t on holiday yet but I could have 
been in Ritchie so I might not have been there but I – it 
doesn’t matter…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  His sequence you say, is fine?  
MS BROWN:   Yes, the 28 t h of January I write him quite a 
formal letter…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now but hang on, don’t go to the 
28 t h of January as yet, Mr Seleka wants to put a question 
with regard to that, I just wanted to make sure that before 
we go to the email, your email of the 28 t h of January we 
20 
have put the email, Mr Tsotsi’s email of 26 January in its 
correct sequence.  So, you have confirmed that that 
sequence you think is correct.  Then after having received 
Mr Tsotsi’s email of 26 January 2015 you then responded 
by way of your email of 28 January, Mr Seleka will then put 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 150 of 331 
 
his question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do you recall the question Ms Brown, 
why did you cast your interest wider than the two sub-
committees that, in your affidavit you accept are the only 
two that you are legally responsible to appoint? 
MS BROWN:   Because I note, if you look at – it’s in your 
documentation somewhere, I note the ones I am not – they 
send a resolution, the Board sends a resolution and, in the 
resolution, and this is all I outline for Mr Tsotsi to know 
and this I get from the legal and governance unit.  
10 
Remember I’ve – I work with the legal and governance unit 
on the compilation of this letter.  So, I say to him that for 
approval, I don’t say to him, I look at the full combination 
of people within the Board.  Some Board members would 
have three/four or two/three positions.  Some members 
would have three/four, I look for that. My office, my 
department looks for expertise, technicalities and so forth.  
So, I take the full list and I’ve done that throughout and 
throughout all the Boards, I take the full list and I note the 
ones that I’m not responsible for or not responsible to 
20 
appoint and I accept the ones that I am supposed – that 
I’m statutory responsible for, that’s why I write that letter, 
nothing else. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Do I understand you to be saying, the 
statement that you indicate which committees you are 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 151 of 331 
 
responsible to appoint even though you say it now you 
didn’t tell him that? 
MS BROWN:   No, I asked him to look – to send me the full 
list of all the people who are being appointed but he has to 
formally send me the lists, that’s what I’m saying to you, 
you have to formally send me the lists as a resolution of 
the Board, the whole list, everybody who has been put into 
committees, must be a full list of the resolution of the 
committees, it’s a resolution that gets passed in the Board 
that resolves that this is what has to happen. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no I hear what you’re saying I just 
wanted to clarify that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Seleka, before I get – last 
time when Mr Tsotsi was giving evidence about these 
emails your junior was working on a document that would 
tell us what the differences are between the different 
compositions, I remember that there was a document that 
was put, given to me but I immediately saw that it wasn’t 
correct.  My recollection is that you and your team were 
going to work on that and come back to say, there is a 
20 
document that correctly reflects what the differences are 
between the different compositions that Mr Tsotsi sent to 
the Minister at different times.  I just don’t have the 
recollection whether that last part has happened? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s going to happen now Chair. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 152 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was meant to happen a long time ago, 
but tell me immediately, you junior should know, whether 
that composition of Mr Tsotsi of the committees on page 
1216 is the same as the so-called Salim Essa composition 
or no? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s by and large the same Chair and I 
would like to hand it up to the Chairperson, we have 
already shared it with…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because you remember there is also 
another one, that one at page 1216 that email was sent at 
10 
13h52 on the 26 t h of January. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one on page 1218 was sent at – one 
minute after that one 26 January 2015 at 13h53 but my 
recollection was that one of these was the same as Mr 
Salim Essa’s composition but another one – the other one 
was different, but I don’t remember which one was 
different. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s why I’m asking which one is the 
20 
same as Salim Essa’s one and which one is different? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   According to Mr Tsotsi the 16 t h of 
December 2014 is Mr Salim Essa’s composition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that we know yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The 26 t h of January 2015, according to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 153 of 331 
 
Mr Tsotsi, that’s Mr Tsotsi’s own revised list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Remember they are both 26 January, 
they are just different times one minute difference. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, I think the one that comes after is 
forwarding, is the Chairperson on page 1215? 
CHAIRPERSON:   1215, I’ve got at the beginning of the 
email it’s addressed to the email address of Ms Brown and 
then below that, it says sent from her IPAD and then below 
that begin forwarded message then it’s from Mr Tsotsi to 
Lynne Brown …[indistinct]@me.com and then it says, “Dear 
10 
Minister”, then on the following page, namely 1216 on the 
hardcopy it has got the composition.  Is that composition 
the same as the Salim Essa composition? 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
Chair 
there 
are 
minor 
differences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if you look at the composition 
on page 1218 on the hardcopy is that the same as the 
Salim Essa composition? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That one is the same as the – the 
minute before this one, which is on page 1215. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so the position is that there is no 
composition among these two compositions that Mr Tsotsi 
emailed, there is no composition that is exactly the same 
as the Salim Essa one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 154 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, they are the same, the two of them? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, those two are the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it’s the same one and they have 
certain differences even though the differences might be a 
few? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, the two are the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I mean compared to…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh yes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That someone ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So with regard to the two emails one on – I 
mean two compositions; one at 2016 page 20 – no page 
1216. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the hard copy and the one at page 
1218 on the hard copy. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say those compositions are one and 
same thing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Are one and the same yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. And they are different in 
certain respects from the Salim Essa ones? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 155 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that – that would tie in if that is 
factually correct if you have got that right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would tie in with Mr Tsotsi’s evidence 
that first he sent this composition which he said came from 
Mr Salim Essa but later on he decided to send his own 
composition. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms Brown I just wanted to clarify 
that because there was a little bit of some confusion when 
10 
Mr Tsotsi was giving evidence and that I did not have a clear 
recollection. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay continue Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Ms Brown I want to piggy back on 
that because Mr Tsotsi’s version as you know it is that you 
ultimately you call him to is it your residence – official 
residence in Pretoria where he finds you with Mr Tony Gupta 
and Mr Salim Essa and you ultimately give him a list of sub-
committees for the composition of the sub-committees which 
20 
he says was the same as the one he had received from Mr 
Salim Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka did you say Mr 
Tsotsi’s version is that he was given that list at the residence 
of the Minister? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 156 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  Ja I am trying to recall whether is it the 
residence or the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My recollection is that Mr Tsotsi’s said the 
Minister emailed her composition which was he said the 
same as Mr Tsotsi’s – Mr Salim Essa’s composition.  That – 
that was my recollection and that when he – when she called 
him to whether it was to his residence or to his – to her 
office I am not sure. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Ms Brown’s office when she – according 
10 
to Mr Tsotsi when Ms Brown called him to the place to which 
she called him where he says she was with Mr Salim Essa 
and Tony Gupta on that occasion the Minister simply said he 
should implement her list.  That is my recollection.  I may be 
wrong. Is it – is it different from yours? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No I think yours is correct.  If I read 
Chair from his first affidavit he says because he says until 
she called me to a meeting.  At the meeting was Salim Essa 
and Tony Gupta.  She merely informed me that the board 
allocations will be the way she had sent to me.  This she did 
20 
in the presence of these two gentlemen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no I just wanted to make sure that 
you do not by mistake misrepresent his version. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you want to go ahead? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 157 of 331 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So Ms Brown that is the evidence of Mr 
Tsotsi to the commission that you then called him to a 
meeting.  Well let me take it step by step.  He sends you the 
composition, the revised one and according to him you would 
have sent to him a composition which on his version it was 
the same as that which Salim Essa had given him.  And when 
you called him to this meeting where Mr Essa and Mr Tony 
Gupta were with you according to him you informed him that 
the board allocations would be the way you had sent to him.  
Your comment on that? 
10 
MS BROWN:  So his – I sent him a list.  I just want to – I 
also want to clarify something.  He says the list I sent him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Was the same as Mr Essa’s lists. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  So why do I not have a copy of that list that I 
sent him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We have… 
MS BROWN:  Does the commission have a copy of that list 
20 
that I sent him?  Not the one he sent me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BROWN:  The one I sent him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes we asked him that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 158 of 331 
 
MS BROWN:  Okay I refute the fact that these two people 
were in my house.  Wherever the house might have be 
whether it is in Cape Town or in Pretoria I refute the fact that 
I have had – that they have been in my house and that I 
called him to a meeting to speak to him about appointing 
these people to this – these committees.  Chair I had a 
board that was appointed.  I wanted the committees to be 
largely, equally allocated technically sound and that must 
come to me as a resolution and that was as far as I wanted 
to go.  Around this time I – actually I do not want to get 
10 
involved in coffee shop politics now. But Chair I do want to 
say that Mr Tsotsi has not made this – this is not the first 
time Mr Tsotsi has made this allegation.  He has done it at 
the Portfolio Committee.  He has done it before, he has done 
it again in the com – he has done it a few times in the 
commission and he continues to say so.  I wonder if Mr 
Tsotsi has ever thought that he should try and allocate the 
day that he was at my house.  Now either one of my official 
residences has a security or a control point that they have to 
come in. Now if he could get the date of when all three of 
20 
them were in my house then I would be happy to hear that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the position by the way is there a 
list – there is no email that was provided to the commission 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 159 of 331 
 
coming from Ms Brown to Mr Tsotsi with a list or was there? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There was not Chair – there is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We have – we have asked Mr Tsotsi both 
about the email or if it is an email from Mr Salim Essa to him 
and then this one from Ms Brown to him.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But Ms Brown is my understanding correct 
that you do not deny that you would have sent him your list.  
When I say your list I accept that it might have been a list 
that came from him and you looked at it to see whether there 
10 
was a balance in the spread of skills and expertise.  Maybe 
you may have changed here and there to say let us have a 
balance but would there be – would there have been a list – 
a composition of committees that you say you would have 
sent to him?  It just happens that we might not have it but 
the – it should have – it would have been there. 
MS BROWN:  Chair I would only respond to Mr Tsotsi 
formally on any lists.  Remember it is not actually a big issue 
who is which lists.  The only issue we have is that those who 
are on the lists are skilled people. They are skilled for that 
20 
particular committee.  That is the only issue that is important 
to me.  The rest who is on which list, what they – it does not 
matter. All of those committees feed back into the board.  So 
why would I make such a big song and dance about getting 
people onto a list, onto a particular list.  The only thing is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 160 of 331 
 
that those lists must be equitably distri – sorry those 
committees must be equitably distributed and the expertise 
levels must be where it is supposed to be.  So people with 
finances should try to be in the Audit and Risk Committee.  I 
think I separated some committees in somewhere they 
combined Audit and Risk with either – I am not absolutely 
sure if it is procurement or something but I think I have – I 
have separated – I asked them I did not separate it I asked 
them to please look into it and separate it because Audit and 
Risk is a very, very big committee.  And it has not a big 
10 
committee it has a big responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but... 
MS BROWN:  But let me put to you this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But my question – my question. 
MS BROWN:  Yes so no. Even your version Chair I have not 
sent him a list. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not send him a list? 
MS BROWN:  No.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  How would he – he have known 
whether you were happy with the spread of the skills in the 
20 
composition of the committees?  Would you have something 
to give him? 
MS BROWN:  I would not know it personally sitting with my 
iPad.  I would only know that information if it went to my 
department. 
 
And 
my 
department 
assess 
the 
skills 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 161 of 331 
 
composition.  That is why on the 28t h when I eventually 
respond to him I tell him to formally write to the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And as far as … 
MS BROWN:  Not to engage me on the committees on a 
private 
emails 
engage 
the 
committees 
through 
the 
department so that we can have clarity on whether the 
committees are working.  By February that year I remember 
the committees were working already.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but do you have any recollection 
whether he did engage with your department on the 
10 
composition of the committees after your email of 28 
January? 
MS BROWN:  I absolutely believe that that would have 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  Because I then get a decision memo from my 
department and the decision memo has the resolution of all 
the 
sub-committees. 
So 
there 
is 
no 
other 
informal 
conversation or no other informal way of appointing those 
committees it comes via a decision memo and it says – and 
20 
it has five people who must check whether – whether it is 
legally right, whether it is financially right, whether it has 
five people check that list and then I check it and I either 
amend it or I approve it and my Deputy Minister notes it.  So 
seven of us sign that document eventually. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 162 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the position… 
MS BROWN:  So if Mr Salim Essa gave him a list initially 
whatever has come to my department in the end they might 
even have changed the list and said no, but you cannot put 
Ms Klein here you should put Ms Klein in this committee 
because that is her skills space.  So they would have been 
able to do that.  But I have not changed any lists. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So on your version there would have 
arrived a time after the 28 t h of January which is your email to 
Mr Tsotsi telling him what you would require including the 
10 
resolution of the board there would have arrived a time after 
the 28t h of January at some stage where he that is Mr Tsotsi 
or the board would have received a document from your 
department whether it was from you or from your officials 
that says we are happy with the following composition of the 
committees, is that correct? 
MS BROWN:  It would have come from my officials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would have come from your officials? 
MS BROWN:  Formerly, formerly it would have come from 
me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  So after the officials have had a conversation 
with their officials who deal with governance matters and 
normally it is the Company Secretary and then that Company 
Secretary goes and deals with Mr Tsotsi.  My officials could 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 163 of 331 
 
deal with me or not necessarily they might say Minister we 
decided to change this or that.  It could have happened in 
that way.  But the formal resolution and – and Chair there is 
actually a formal resolution that I have seen in one of the 
packs, one of the bundles.  There is a formal resolution 
where it shows to answer Mr Seleka’s question that I appoint 
the two committees and I note the other committees. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well there would still be questions around 
this issue but I see we are at five past five. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know whether the next work 
stream of – is ready I am told they are ready.  So I think we 
may have to stop here and adjourn but let us talk about the 
way forward.  I – I would like us not to delay – not to take 
long before Ms Brown is able to come back and complete her 
evidence.  I am going to mention some dates to all of you 
because I think maybe we can quickly sort it out here.  If we 
cannot then we will sort it out later.  If everybody concerned 
is available I can make myself available tomorrow Saturday 
in the morning to continue with Ms Brown’s evidence.  If you 
20 
are not available I can make myself available on Monday 
morning.  I know that Monday morning is a public holiday 
and I know that you might not be available but I mention 
these two days so that if by chance everybody says, no let 
us do tomorrow morning then we could do it.  If everybody 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 164 of 331 
 
says no let us do it Monday morning we could do it.  But if 
nobody – if there is one or more people who are not 
available then we will have to find some other time.  Can I 
hear from the legal team for Ms Brown? 
ADV LUSENGA:  Chair both these are a bit of a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Both days are a bit of a problem? 
ADV LUSENGA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay and with Ms Brown as well 
or not necessarily? 
MS BROWN:  Saturday morning is a problem for me Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BROWN:  But Monday is – I am okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MS BROWN:  If – ja Monday morning I am fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would be fine.  With you Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I am permanently employed at the 
commission Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But even those who are employed at the 
commission might say they are entitled to some holiday.  But 
I just check with Ms Brown’s legal team whether seeing that 
20 
all of us including her might be able to make a plan for 
Monday morning may I find out whether it is completely 
impossible for them to juggle things around or it is 
something that they can look at and maybe they can phone 
Mr Seleka this evening to say look we have been able to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 165 of 331 
 
juggle things around.   
ADV LUSENGA:  I am – I am mulling over the possibility of 
the Monday I would also want this to be rounded up quickly.  
In the back of my mind I am thinking of rearranging certain 
things.  I will let Mr Seleka know in all probability we can 
work out something for Monday.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no if your situation permits you to 
move things around and to be able to be available we would 
really appreciate it.  As everybody knows we are running out 
of time as the commission so that is why we have day 
10 
sessions and evening sessions.  Last night I left the hearing 
at something to nine about quarter to nine.  We are just 
trying to try and hear as many witnesses as possible that 
need to be heard and to finish so if your situation will permit 
and you will be able to juggle around and be available we 
would really appreciate that.  And thank you Ms Brown for 
indicating that from your side you would be available on 
Monday morning.  So I think what will happen is that once 
your counsel has spoken to Mr Seleka maybe later this 
evening even if it is tomorrow if this evening things do not 
20 
get sorted out then everybody will be informed whether the 
arrangement is successful for Monday or not successful.  If it 
is not successful we will have to find another time but 
hopefully we will cross our fingers hopefully it will be 
successful.  But thank you very much to everybody we are 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 166 of 331 
 
going to adjourn the day session.  I will take about ten 
minutes – fifteen minutes break and then I will come back for 
the evening session.  Thank you very much to everybody  We 
adjourn. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV LUSENGA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS BROWN:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Notshe.  Good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Good afternoon, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it good evening? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Good evening, Mr Mantashe. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Good evening, Deputy Chief 
20 
Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, thank you.  Thank you very 
much for availing yourself to assist the Commission, 
particularly, for availing yourself in the evening and thank 
you to your legal team for availing themselves during the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 167 of 331 
 
evening as well. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Notshe, you said 
Mr Mantashe’s legal team will also link with us via Zoom or 
video? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, I understand they are with him 
where he is now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, they will appear ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, no... [Speaker unclear – 
interruption in intermission] 
10 
ADV NALANE SC:   I am here, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I understand if you speak your 
face will appear.  So just speak again. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I cannot see you but I can hear 
you. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay.  I have tried to look into the 
camera. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it may well be that the technician 
here need to...  Oh, there you come.  There you come. 
20 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, good evening to you. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Good evening, Deputy Chief Justice.  
My name is Advocate Fana Nalane SC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 168 of 331 
 
ADV NALANE SC:   I am instructed by Buthelezi Vilakazi 
Attorneys and I appear together with my learned junior, 
Advocate Sibongiseni Qagana on behalf of Mr Mantashe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  For the purposes 
of the transcribers, I think, please just spell Qagana so 
that they will spell it correctly in the transcript.  I do not 
think they will have a problem with your surname. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, it is Q-a-g-a-n-a. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Thank you very much.   
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And thank you to you and your junior as 
well and the instructing attorneys for cooperating with the 
Commission so that we could have this evening session.   
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
Okay 
Mr 
Notshe 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
20 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thanks for cooperating with us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chairperson, we are appearing 
together with Mr Refiloe Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 169 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chairperson, the genesis of today’s 
hearing is the evidence of Mr Agrizzi and Mr Richard le 
Roux.  It is in respect of the security installations that were 
done at the house of Minister Mantashe and both here in 
Gauteng and in the Eastern Cape.  The farm in the Eastern 
Cape and the houses here.   
 
And Chairperson, the then Minister Mantashe 
applied for leave to cross-examine Mr Agrizzi and to cross-
examine Mr Le Roux.   
 
So the bundle before you – the exhibit before 
10 
you will contain that application and that application, you 
will see, it contains the affidavit of Mr Mantashe where his 
affairs to the evidence of Mr Agrizzi, and it also contains 
the responses of both Mr Agrizzi and Mr Le Roux.   
 
And then it has also a replying affidavit of 
Mr Mantashe, and that Chair, appears in BOSASA Bundle 3 
and then it is Exhibit T-32 of that bundle.  And before that - 
before the Chair goes there, can we have Mr Mantashe’s 
sworn in and then we can take it from there? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe before you start doing that.  
20 
Do you not want to just remind the public what the issues 
are that would be covered?  And then the oath or 
affirmation can be administered and thereafter we start. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, firstly the evidence of Mr Agrizzi 
was to the effect that BOSASA had targeted certain people 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 170 of 331 
 
which they regarded as influential and they have done 
favours for those people and one of those people was 
Mr Mantashe, and we must mention that at that stage he 
was not yet a Minister. 
 
And what they did, they did some security 
installations in his house in Gauteng and his house in the 
Eastern Cape, Chala and also his farm.  And then there is 
evidence, that of Mr Richard le Roux who actually did the 
work.  And it is not in dispute that the work was done at all 
on these three premises.   
10 
 
The real issue, the dispute is the value of the 
work, rand value of the work that was done, and also, the 
issue is whether Mr Mantashe should have allowed that 
work to be done for him.   
 
And Mr Mantashe has in his application to cross-
examine the two witnesses, he has given a statement 
explaining how he got the work to be done and his 
explanation being that it was done by Papa Leshabane.   
 
These services were offered to him by Papa 
Leshabane and his evidence is that, on the affidavit, he 
20 
knew Papa Leshabane.  He is a friend and a family friend 
and he even in his – one of the children’s graduation, he 
was the master of the ceremony.  Well, those(?) days a 
personal ceremony.  It was a personal ceremony.  And 
Mr Leshabane offered to do this free of charge. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 171 of 331 
 
 
So the issue is – the issue now is whether he 
should have accepted that service and that gift from 
Mr Leshabane.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Then, Registrar, 
you can administer the oath or affirmation to Minister 
Mantashe.   
REGISTRAR:   Mr Mantashe, will you be taking the oath or 
affirmation? 
WITNESS:   I will take the oath. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
10 
WITNESS:   My name is Samson Gwede Mantashe. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   I have no objection at all. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes, an oath is binding. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, 
20 
so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
SAMSON GWEDE MANTASHE:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Yes, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Mantashe, do you confirm that you 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 172 of 331 
 
have in front of you a document which is marked Exhibit T-
32? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I have got the document. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, for the record and may I 
reiterate again that this is part of BOSA Bundle 3? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us get the bundles here first.  
Which bundle were you confirming he has got in front of 
him? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is an exhibit.  It is Bundle 3 but 
Exhibit T-32. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay the lever arch file is BOSASA 
Bundle 3. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you will refer to his affidavit 
which is a particular exhibit in that file? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is T-32 in the file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And on page – BOSASA 03187.  
Mr Mantashe, whilst I am on that.  When we talk about the 
pages, you will see on the left-hand of the document at the 
20 
top left-hand, there are – there is a name BOSASA and 
then numbers in black.  Do you see that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Is it BOSASA 0319?  It is the first 
page. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  When we refer then to documents 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 173 of 331 
 
– when we refer to pages, we are referring to that.  
Understand? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So whenever I am referring you to 
pages, I will be referring to the page on the left-hand 
corner at the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So disregard the red numbers.  Just 
regard – if there are red numbers on any page as well as 
black numbers, disregard the red numbers.  Focus on the 
black numbers.  But on some pages, you will only have 
10 
black numbers on the top left-hand corner. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Do you understand Mr Mantashe? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I see there are black and red, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And also, when we refer to the 
pages, although it is written BOSASA-03, the number, we 
will not be saying BOSASA-03.  We will just go to the last 
three digits.  If it is three digits or one.  So I am at page 
187.  So if we refer to that page, we will just say page 187.  
So we forget about BOSASA and 03. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You understand? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Ja, I see page 187 on the 
covering page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So when we refer to a page, we 
will just say 187 without saying BOSASA-03. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 174 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Mantashe, you deposed to about 
three affidavits wherein you are applying to cross-examine 
Mr Agrizzi and Mr Richard le Roux.  You remember? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I remember that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And in those affidavits, you have set 
out your version of events regarding the security, the 
features that were installed in your three properties.  You 
remember? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I remember that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   For now, you can forget about the 
affidavit about the condonation.  Just deal with the issue of 
the security upgrades.  You confirm that those security 
were done at your three premises.  Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I refer to them as cameras 
because security upgrade is a broader concept. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, but you confirm that they were 
installed at your premises? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   The cameras were installed in all 
20 
my premises, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now tell me ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second Mr Notshe.  I just want 
to 
make 
sure. 
 
I 
know 
what 
is 
happening 
here.  
Mr Mantashe’s 
application 
for 
leave 
to 
cross-examine 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 175 of 331 
 
Mr Agrizzi, has that been deposed off or is that still 
pending?  I have dealt with so many applications for leave 
to cross-examine.  I forget.  Is that still pending?  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is that been decided? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, my recollection Chair is that it is 
still pending. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Let me just... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand from my junior that you 
granted the leave to cross-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  But it is the actual cross-
examination that has not taken place? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It has not taken place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, in all these matters, the personal 
ones for cross-examine, we will find that they have not 
testified and then we arrange for cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no, that is fine.  Yes, you may 
20 
continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now Mr Mantashe, I would like you to 
explain to the Chairperson about the issues surrounding 
the installation of these cameras at your properties.  How 
did it come about? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 176 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe just to clarify that Mr Mantashe.  
We will just give you a chance to put the story of how this 
happened in your own words and then Mr Notshe, when you 
are done can then put questions but to say this is how the 
whole thing happened and complete the story. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes.  I had attempted break-ins in 
my property in Boksburg.  And when I had a discussion 
with my security advisor who was employed by the ANC to 
deal with my security, we agreed that we needed cameras 
10 
so that whenever there will be investigations, would have 
ability to assist in investigations.   
 
Then I give the work to the security advisor to 
deal with it because he knows the field.  I do not know the 
field.  He bought cameras to install in my property.   
 
In that process, Papa Leshabane arrived in 
Boksburg.  I had a discussion with him.  He is available to 
give evidence because anything they discussed will be – I 
will... the entire person(?).   
 
And Papa Leshabane, he said he will offer to 
20 
give better cameras because the cameras we got from 
Game, were of an lesser(?) quality.  That is how that 
process got started.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you may proceed to deal with what 
you may have discovered later.  What was – what you say 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 177 of 331 
 
to what has been put up or otherwise, if you prefer that 
Mr Notshe can start leading you from now on, he can lead 
you. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   He can lead me from here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you talk about the property in 
Boksburg but you know and it is not in dispute that you had 
properties in the Eastern Cape.  Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And installation was done at those 
10 
properties as well? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   How did it come about that installation 
was done on those properties as well? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   If you look, there was a time 
difference between installations.  You will see that the one 
in the Eastern Cape was informed by the success of the 
Boksburg installation.   
 
We installed cameras in Boksburg in July 2013.  
And the installation were affected in the Eastern Cape in 
20 
2016 having seen the effectiveness of the cameras in 
Boksburg, where we also even found a person who was 
actually... our property, who is working in the property and 
then we thought that we should put those cameras in those 
properties as well. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 178 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  So there was a three year 
difference ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...in the installation of the property in 
Boksburg and the Eastern Cape.  Am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, you are correct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now you have told the 
Chairperson about the – how it came about that the 
cameras were installed in Boksburg.  How did it come 
about, the installation of the property of the cameras in the 
10 
Eastern Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Let me repeat myself.  We saw 
the installation of the cameras in Boksburg. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And thought that we needed them 
in the Eastern Cape because we are... 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And then we thought. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  So it was in the Eastern Cape, 
you went with that project?  You decided the cameras in 
20 
Boksburg are working well and therefore you must install 
proper cameras in the Eastern Cape as well.  Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Where did you – who did you engage 
to install those cameras? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 179 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   In the political settings, there is a 
very strict Division of Labour.  I was kept out of the details 
of security arrangements and the security advisor handled 
that aspect themselves. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now you are saying to the 
Commission, Papa Leshabane was only involved in the 
Boksburg because he overheard you talking about the 
installations in Boksburg.  Am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I did not say that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   What did you say? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I said Papa Leshabane came to 
the Boksburg property when Mzonke was working on the 
project in Boksburg. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And offered Mzonke to give better 
cameras than what we got from Game. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Now and they got into the 
Eastern Cape and other areas.  Then that was their 
arrangements as the security team.   
20 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
can 
you 
explain 
to 
the 
Commission as to exactly how it happened?  And because 
in your statements, you give the impression that Papa 
Leshabane said he is going to take over the installation 
and pay for the installation of all three properties.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 180 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I will give you a third 
person’s evidence(?) in that regard.  That is why Mzonke 
Nyakaza submitted an affidavit in that regard because it is 
Mzonke Nyakaza who was delivered the security details 
without involving me. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But did you read the statement of 
Mzonke? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I did read it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Does it tell the Commission as to how 
the – this was done, was arranged? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Uhm... 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   To jog your memory.  Can you look at 
page 247, which is the statement of Mzonke Nyakaza? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I see it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, page 247 is the affidavit of 
Mzompela Nyakaza.  Is that the same as Mzonke? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is the same as Mzonke. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the gist of that statement is on 
20 
page 248, paragraph 3. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And he says ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I start reading: 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 181 of 331 
 
“I have read the statement of the applicant...” 
 
The applicant being you. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
“...and I confirm the context thereof insofar as 
it relates to me...” 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now your statement does not say that 
the person who initiated and who arranged for the payment 
of the security installation in the Eastern Cape was him.  It 
10 
does not say so.  Perhaps I have missed it.  Can you 
perhaps take us to the part where you say he is the person 
who arranged that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  Let me remind you what I am 
saying. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I am saying.  Security details 
were left in the hands of Mzonke, who apparently does it, 
who was my security advisor. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Ja.  So details include Eastern 
Cape or Boksburg.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Mantashe, unless I misunderstood 
your statement.  Your statement does not say anywhere 
that Mr Nyakaza also arranged for the payments of the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 182 of 331 
 
installation or does it? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, no.  We were not talking 
about payments.  You have not asked me about payments.  
You asked me and we thought about his connection. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now is there – who then arranged for 
the payments of the installations? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I have given the statement... 
apparently, it does not say.  Papa Leshabane offered to 
10 
pay for the cameras at his own costs.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am sorry.  I do not want this to 
appear and look funny for you.  Mr Nyakaza does not say 
that I have looked(?) at his statement.  He does not 
...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Go through my statement.  Where 
is my...?  Let us go to my statement. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I said, Mzonke explained that 
Papa Leshabane offered to give cameras at his own costs. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  And perhaps I missed that.  
Where is that in your statement? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Let us just get the statement... 
CHAIRPERSON:   He wanted you to remind him where to 
find the statement. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 183 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   His statement starts ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Your statement is at page 199.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I was looking at the one at 
page 235.  199? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, just...  Mr Mantashe, before you 
respond.  Chair, you have the two statements.  The one 
deals with the evidence of Agrizzi and the other deals with 
10 
the evidence of Richard Le Roux. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   At 199, it deals with the evidence of 
Agrizzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Thank you.  And where is the 
other one? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The other one is at 235.  At least, one of 
the – you said there are three of his, right? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   There are three of his.  The one is for 
20 
the condonation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Then there are these two which are the 
founding – in inverted commas the “founding statements” 
and then there is a reply.  But let us deal now with the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 184 of 331 
 
founding, the first founding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I think he wants to see both.  
The other one is at 235, Mr Mantashe. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Where is the founding statement? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
The 
founding 
statement, 
tell 
him 
Mr Notshe. Is that the one at 199? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Both are at 199.  The founding 
statement, 199, deals with the evidence of Mr Agrizzi.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then the founding at 235, it deals 
with the evidence of Mr Richard Le Roux.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Are they both founding affidavits? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   199 or 41 and 235 for the other. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   But I want my founding affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you found it? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Okay.  Okay, okay, okay.  Page 
238.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   238. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   13, 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And at page 15.   
“I am informed by Mzonke that Papa requested 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 185 of 331 
 
to see the cameras that would be installed and 
his opinion was that they were of inferior 
quality.   
Papa then offered to provide Mzonke with their 
quality, CCTV footage and security system.  
Further that, he will bear the costs of the 
equipment and installation. 
Mzonke informed the offer... on the basis of 
good relationship. 
I had... and I have accepted the offer and I 
10 
asked him, Papa, about the costs. 
He confirmed that the costs will be borne by...” 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is that it? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now can you just read – go back to 
237 and read paragraph 12? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Paragraph 12. 
“During the same period, Papa arrived at my 
house in Boksburg to find Mzonke busy with 
the installation of the cameras around the 
20 
house...” 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And... continue from that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now and then you confirm in your 
later paragraphs that you then spoke to Papa and then he 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 186 of 331 
 
said he will then bear the costs of the house in Boksburg.  
Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It refers(?) in your statement, alright? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not think there is reference 
to Boksburg.  There is reference to cameras.  And the 
discussion takes place in Boksburg. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, the...  if, Mr Mantashe, you look 
at paragraph 12.  Papa arrives at your house whilst 
Mzonke is busy with installation. 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then Mzonke informs you that 
Papa says he can find better equipment.  Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then you speak to Papa. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then he says he will do it at his 
costs.  Am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This is the same day, same period or 
20 
was it another period? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   What is the material purpose of 
that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Do not worry.  Can you just answer the 
question?  Is it the same ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 187 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I must worry it because I must 
give you appropriate answers. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   When you asked – when you spoke to 
Mzonke and you spoke to Papa about costs.  Is it on the 
day that Papa came to your house and found Mzonke 
installing security cameras? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It was in 2013.  I would imagine 
so.  I cannot remember but I think it is. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now can you tell the Commission and 
tell the Commission where your place now where you deal 
10 
with how the cameras and the costs – who pay the costs of 
the cameras for your houses and your farm in the Eastern 
Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I have dealt with that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I dealt with that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Is it somewhere – anywhere 
here? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Because I have dealt with that.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Can you deal with that now? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And tell the Commission, where and 
when and who paid for the installation of the security 
cameras in your premises in the Eastern Cape. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Let me go back.  Security details 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 188 of 331 
 
were handled by Mzonke Nyakaza that is the person who 
handled security details, whether it is in Boksburg or in Cala.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did you find out from him as to who was 
paying for the security, to do the security installations? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I found out after there was a big 
issue BOSASA but we paid for [indistinct – dropping voice] 
and he said no, that arrangement in Boksburg continued 
throughout. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So when they were installed you did not 
know who was responsible for the payments of the security 
10 
in the Eastern Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   The arrangement between Mzonke 
and Papa continued. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But when they were installed you did not 
know about that, did you? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Whom did you think was paying for the 
security installations? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Papa and Mzonke and had 
arrangement that Papa would offer security that were of 
20 
higher quality and he will do that his own costs. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And that arrangement continued. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   If I understand this was – the 
arrangement he made was in 2013. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 189 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then you said in your evidence you 
then found that this is working well and three years later you 
decided that the same arrangement should be made in your 
properties in Eastern Cape.  Am I correct or did I 
misunderstand you? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   We used the term we because it 
was an outcome of a discussion with my security team. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, it is now after three years after 
Boksburg meeting, you found that …[intervenes] 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It is continuous, after in Boksburg, 
those 
cameras 
helped 
us 
eliminate 
dangers 
on 
two 
occasions, so as we discussed that – we in a discussion I 
said listen, this thing works well, it can work in Cala, it can 
work in the Vaal, both where there are no security fences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe – I am sorry, Mr Notshe, just 
so that I understand Mr Mantashe.  First Mr – your security 
adviser had bought security cameras for the Boksburg 
property, is that correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   With a view to having them installed. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Papa Leshabane…[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Leshabane. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 190 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Leshabane, ja, had a discussion with him 
in which discussion he said after seeing these cameras that 
your security adviser had bought, he said these are poor 
quality cameras. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he offered to buy at his own costs 
good quality cameras, is that correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In that discussion you were not there, it 
was the two of them. 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But subsequently you were told about this 
discussion by your security adviser. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And but there was a time when you had a 
discussion with Papa Leshabane about this offer as well, is 
that right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I asked him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You asked him. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I asked him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you sought to confirm who was going 
to be responsible for the costs, is that right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he confirmed to you that he would be 
responsible for the costs. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 191 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And is your recollection that those 
discussions were in 2013? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   In my recollection I think the 
installation costs were around July 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and the discussion would have been 
sometime earlier than that but in 2013 as you recall? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It was around that time, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Now the discussion, as you 
10 
understood it at that time, both when your secretary adviser 
told you what he and Mr Papa Leshabane had asked and 
when you had a discussion with Mr Papa Leshabane, was it 
about cameras in the Boksburg property? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or was it about cameras beyond the 
Boksburg property? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It was cameras in Boksburg. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Boksburg. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   At the time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And did you say that after 
the cameras had been installed on the Boksburg property a 
period of about three years last before they were installed in 
the other properties in the Eastern Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 192 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that so? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Notshe, take it from 
there.  Switch on your mic. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   When did then Mr Leshabane undertake 
to pay now for the installations of the properties in the 
Eastern Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That question can be answered by 
Mr Nyakaza because at that point in time it was a security 
operation. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And are you telling the Commission then 
that Mr Nyakaza might have approached Mr Leshabane 
without your knowledge to pay for the installations at 
…[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not think he would approach 
him with payment.  He would approach him with the 
extension of the security arrangements to other properties. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And I am sure he did not expect that 
these are not going to be paid for, someone had to pay for 
this security …[intervenes] 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not know if the discussion 
there – if they agreed on the payment to have the same 
arrangement, it is their agreement. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you read the evidence of both Mr 
Agrizzi and Mr Richard le Roux, am I right? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 193 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I did. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then you, before you deposed to the 
affidavit, you must have made enquiries from Mzonke as to 
what happened and who paid for the security arrangement in 
your Eastern Cape properties.  You must have? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  Mzonke was responsible for 
my security. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And they made arrangements for 
security throughout and when I read Le Roux and Agrizzi’s 
10 
affidavits, 
the 
many 
things 
I 
pick 
up 
there. 
 
One, 
contradictions on the price, that is the first one.  Then I read 
Leshabane’s affidavit who is disputing those two prices and I 
would imagine that even if Leshabane was offering these 
cameras, he would be the person who would actually know 
the prices and he dispute both the prices. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Alright, let us move back a little bit.  My 
initial question to you was this, after you read the affidavits 
of both Mr Agrizzi and Mr le Roux. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I did. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And now you are preparing to answer 
this in your founding affidavit, did you find out from Mzonke 
as to who paid for your properties in the Eastern Cape?  Did 
you? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   My understanding from Mzonke is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 194 of 331 
 
that the arrangement in Boksburg extended to the Eastern 
Cape. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did you ask him who authorised him to 
ask Mr Leshabane for the extension of the arrangements in 
Boksburg? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  I did not ask him that 
precisely 
because 
our 
arrangement, 
our 
working 
and 
relationship with Mzonke is that of a security team and 
security team deals with the nitty gritties of the security 
arrangements. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:    I understand. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And they would come to me on a 
need to know basis. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand but they are not your 
financiers, they are just security people, they do not finance 
your security, am I correct?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, they did not finance my 
security, my security was financed by the ANC. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So did you ask him whether he asked 
the ANC then to extend …[intervenes] 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not ask that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Why did you not ask him to find out who 
authorised to extend the arrangement in Boksburg? 
CHAIRPERSON:   May I ask this question prior to that, Mr 
Notshe? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 195 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mantashe, at same stage you must 
have asked Mr Mzonke to tell you how it came about that the 
Eastern Cape properties were also provided with security 
cameras and who paid even before you could ask whether he 
was authorised or not authorised.  Did you ask him to just 
tell you the story, how did it come about? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You see, there were difficulties between 
a legal process and a traditional arrangement.  In a 
traditional arrangement, Mr Chairperson, Mr Chairman, we 
10 
help one another in dealing with a number of projects, you 
see?  If Mantashe is going to get married we come together 
and [speaking vernacular] and people contribute.  The 
questions that are legal that you are asking now do not arise 
because we are a group, in a family arrangement we are in a 
traditional arrangement, people make contributions and 
those contributions are not looking suspicious until years 
later there is a Commission.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I – when I say there must have been 
time when you asked him to just tell you exactly how it came 
20 
about, that could well be after Mr Agrizzi and Mr Richard le 
Roux started giving evidence but I am saying I would expect 
that at some stage prior to today or maybe prior to you doing 
your affidavits you would have said well, I knew before the 
security cameras were installed by Mr Leshabane at the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 196 of 331 
 
Boksburg property, I had to even confirm with him that the 
costs would be borne by him, so he confirmed to me.  But 
now, after that, I found that the properties in the Eastern 
Cape have also been – cameras have been installed there 
but I have not been involved in any such discussion, now 
there is this whole issue coming out in the Commission and I 
want to know exactly how it came about.   
So I am saying, my expectation is that at some stage 
at least maybe after Mr Agrizzi and Mr Richard le Roux had 
given evidence, you would have been interested to find out 
10 
how did it come about, did Mr Leshabane just offer on his 
own or was he approached by Mzonke to say let us extend 
this arrangement that has applied in Boksburg to the Eastern 
Cape.  That is my expectation.  Did that not happen? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  What I was told that Mzonke 
and 
Leshabane 
agreed 
to 
extend 
the 
arrangement 
in 
Boksburg to Eastern Cape properties.  What I did not ask is 
whether it was Mzonke who approached Leshabane or 
Leshabane – I made an assumption that in their usual 
conversation and discussion they agreed to extend the 
20 
arrangement to the Eastern Cape. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you.  And you are saying to the 
Commission you did not find out how did Mr Leshabane 
undertake to pay for the installations in the Eastern Cape? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 197 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not ask the details of 
that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now at some stage now when you were 
answering the questions, you are saying that the ANC would 
pay for those installations ,am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I said – do not destruct what I 
said. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I apologise if I did. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   But do not do that because if you 
do that, I will suspect malice.  I said the ANC was 
10 
responsible for my security. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I did not say the ANC would pay for 
the installation, I did not say that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And it was – was it also responsible for 
paying for the security? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   What does that mean?  Let me give 
you my – let me explain to you.  Maybe experience for an 
NGO is limited in the [indistinct – dropping voice] is when 
you work for an NGO which the ANC is, to a great extent, is 
20 
that you live in a way where you are almost living for survival 
but you get satisfaction in the work you do.  So the ANC 
does not have a pile of money to pay for that and that and 
that, security people are mainly in the ANC by the way, do 
discuss and make arrangements for security.  They drive 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 198 of 331 
 
your car, they guard you, they go with you.  So when you say 
ANC should have budgeted for security, they know that it is 
important for me to have security but they may not be in a 
position to pay you, that is why we were doing that project 
ourselves and Papa Leshabane did not join the ANC in that 
project, they join our own team in that project. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So you knew you were responsible for 
the payment of security instalments in your houses, am I 
correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes but I also knew that there was 
10 
an offer by Papa Leshabane to foot the cost of cameras. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And that was in Boksburg only?  You 
knew about Boksburg only? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Now you are supplementing(?) your 
family setup. I said earlier Papa Leshabane was a family 
friend because he was always mingling with – there are a 
group of young people in the family and in that process had 
known  Mzonke and they had discussion and they made their 
own arrangement with that setup of a family.  Okay, so you 
want us to make a family discussion a formal meeting.  It 
20 
does not always work like that, they come there and say no, 
listen, leave those cameras, they are very poor, I will give 
you cameras and I would imagine Mzonke would not know 
where Papa would get the cameras and accept the offer 
because it is where the good offer in a project we were 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 199 of 331 
 
already undertaking. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   At that time 2013 what were you in the 
ANC? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I was Secretary General. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   in 2016? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I was Secretary General.  I was 
Secretary General for ten years. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  And Mzonke – and Papa 
Leshabane, where was he working at the time? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   He was working at BOSASA. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you knew he was working at 
BOSASA. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes and I had no problem with 
BOSASA at the time [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   How much was he earning? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Because BOSASA is a group of 
[indistinct] 18.41 which was initiated by ANC women, so we 
had no tensions(?) with BOSASA at the time. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  And how much was he earning? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not know, I do not ask 
20 
people’s salaries. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did he say to you this money is going to 
come from his pocket or from BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   He said he will carry the cost. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you did not bother to ask him where 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 200 of 331 
 
he would get the money to carry the cost? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Why would I do that?  I do not ask 
people’s earnings, it is not my business, I do not tell people 
my earnings. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now when the installations were 
done at your Eastern Cape properties were you satisfied with 
those installations? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I am satisfied [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And did you ever enquire – sorry, sorry, 
10 
I spoke over you, I apologise. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, [speaking vernacular] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I apologise, I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mantashe, you will have to give an 
English translation of that. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, [speaking vernacular] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He said I am sitting on his beard. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, it is unintentional. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you were saying something and he 
20 
interrupted you and he wants you to finish. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I am saying the installation in 
the Eastern Cape satisfied me and I am still satisfied, they 
do what was intended.  That is why we were able to get a 
[indistinct] 20.15 that went to go and steal my sheep, 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 201 of 331 
 
because [indistinct] 20.18. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now when you saw this installation and 
you were satisfied with it, did you ever ask how much it 
cost? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I did not. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Why? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Because the security team was 
working on that and they were satisfied with it. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And they are satisfied with the efficacy 
of the cameras but did you find out how much it cost them to 
install those …[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not, I did not ask that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And up to to date you do not know how 
much it cost to install those? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I am reading now that Agrizzi 
says it is 655, I read that Le Roux says it is 300, I read that 
[indistinct] 21.13 will say it is much less than that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  When …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Do you recall – okay, let me 
start with this question.  Is the position that you never knew 
before the cameras were installed in the Eastern Cape you 
never knew in advance that they were going to be installed 
or did you? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 202 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Mzonke told me that we are 
extending the project to the Eastern Cape I knew, that is 
the… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so he told you that before the actual 
installations in the Eastern Cape? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, almost simultaneously, they 
were extending the project, then he said that project we are 
extending to the Eastern Cape. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   And I understood. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And how long after the 
installation had taken place did you have the opportunity of 
seeing the cameras in those properties? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I cannot remember because I go 
home to that as I am – I cannot remember now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But probably it might not have been a long 
time after that …[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I go home regularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you.  You have already confirmed 
20 
that to the Eastern Cape you did not ask how much it cost.  
Did you enquire about cost of the installations in Boksburg? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And at that time you knew that Papa 
Leshabane was working for BOSASA, am I correct? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 203 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes.  Even if he worked for the 
Department of the Justice, whether he would have been 
working for the ANC or somebody,  that is not material.  
Papa Leshabane offered to give us cameras of superior 
quality in a project we are undertaking. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   So working for BOSASA or 
whatever would not make material – not unless I knew it 
hindsight, which is an exact science to say ja, BOSASA now 
– then once the BOSASA issue comes up, then it becomes 
10 
an issue.  At that time it was not an issue.  So working for 
BOSASA, others working for that, were not an issue, 
amongst the [indistinct] 23.52 who used to come to my place 
regularly, some were working for [indistinct] 24.02, not 
coming as anybody else, coming as a group of young people 
intermingling  and the place is mine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Can we confine ourselves for now to 
Leshabane? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I am not confining myself because 
I am confining to – that he was working for BOSASA was 
20 
immaterial at the time. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You knew he was working for BOSASA, 
am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, yes, he was working for 
BOSASA, ja. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 204 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did you know what position he was 
occupying in BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   At that time you knew that BOSASA had 
been awarded contracts by government? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I was not in government, I was not 
in government.  The only thing I know about BOSASA in 
government was the West Rand Youth Centre, that is all I 
knew.  The other projects, I was not in government. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But you knew that they had a contract 
10 
with government, am I right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I knew that BOSASA was a school 
for the juvenile centre in the West Rand.  Other contracts 
were not really my business, I did not know [indistinct – 
dropping voice] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And at that time you were the 
Chairperson of the ANC, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   The Secretary General. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, the Secretary General of the 
ANC, am I correct? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And it is well-known – it is well-known 
that the Secretary General and the executive committee of 
the ANC is responsible for – it is very influential on 
government appointments and government ministers – an 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 205 of 331 
 
appointment of ministers, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It is well-known to who? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is not a secret, is it? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, well the relationship with them 
when you say it is well-known …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, I apologise for using the term. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Well-known by who? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Well, I thought it is public knowledge, 
that would be …[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  If it is public knowledge, yes, I 
10 
was Secretary General, I was not in public. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  But you were in the National 
Executive Committee of the ANC.  
MINISTER 
MANTASHE:   
Not 
the 
National 
Executive 
Committee, I was the Secretary General. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Of the ANC. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes and in the National Executive 
Committee. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   So you do not know that the 
20 
Secretary General is part of the NEC.  After – when we elect 
an NEC we first elect six people. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Then elect the additional members. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 206 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   One of the six people is the 
Secretary General. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now these questions, all you need 
to do is just to confirm it, if it is not, then you explain.  Now 
you have explained Secretary General was a member of the 
National Executive Committee.  The National Executive 
Committee …[intervenes] 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Secretary General is always a 
member of the NEC of the ANC, he was  – he is always even 
today, the Secretary General is a member of the NEC. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand.  And the NEC is influential 
in the appointment of ministers and high-ranking government 
official, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Actually, we are going to come to 
the Commission on that issue.  We are going to come to the 
Commission on that issue.  The Commission has asked NEC 
to come here and explain the issue of deployment and the 
way we relate, how do we relate with the caucus of the ANC 
and so forth and I think it would be incorrect of me to be 
asked to give that evidence here today. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The reason I am – the only reason I am 
asking you that is that you were an influential person at that 
time, 2013 and 2016, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not know influential who. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   In the sense that you were the National 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 207 of 331 
 
Executive Committee of the ANC which had a power to 
influence the decisions of the appointment of influential 
people in government. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No.  If you want me to give 
evidence that I am going to bring here, let me give you a 
taste of it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Please. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   There is a deployment committee 
in the ANC. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Of which the SG is not a member, 
okay? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Okay. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   The Secretary General is not a 
member of the deployment committee, okay? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Okay. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   But deployment of ministers is a 
prerogative of the President. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Ja.  But in the ANC policies is that 
20 
the President must first consult first the officials and then 
the NEC. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Okay, so it is not the NEC 
appointing cabinet, no, the President appoints cabinet.  He 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 208 of 331 
 
consults and say I am appointing X, Y and Z. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   We can express views but at the 
time we [indistinct] 29.24 expressed the views. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now you were sitting at that time 
as a person who can express view on the appointment of 
ministers, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, no, no. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You have just said so.  ANC because 
you are venturing on an area that has nothing to do with 
10 
what we are here for because Cabinet Ministers are a 
prerogatory[sic] of the ANC by the constitution of the 
Republic and the plan then as a matter of practice, does 
inform and consult the structures of the ANC 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Because of one, but we do not 
say no, no, no not that one, this one, no.  
 
You have the prerogative to appoint, unless there is 
something terrible wrong with the candidate I will say but 
president, you are going to attract yourself trouble in this 
20 
one.  You are not appointing cabinet members.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So you were sitting that time in a 
committee which I do not want to use the hard word to say 
instruct, but to advise the president on his appointments, 
am I right? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 209 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might wish Mr Notshe, consider 
whether you want to put your final proposition that you 
want to put to him and then if you need to support it with 
certain other facts ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe do so.  Maybe you might with to 
put ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The final proposition that you would like 
to put.  
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Mr Chairman? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  We have been invited to the 
commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  As the former subcontracts.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MINISTER 
MANTASHE: 
 
To 
explain 
the 
employment 
process and other issue and other issue.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not think it is correct to try to 
push me to give that evidence today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Because I am bringing that 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 210 of 331 
 
evidence here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  In due course.  No, no it is true that the 
ANC has been invited and it has accepted invitation to 
come and give evidence, and the person who might give 
evidence might well be Mr Mantashe in regard to those 
matters.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So I think that one has got to bear that in 
mind.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That for when, if it is him who comes to 
give that evidence on behalf of the ANC, he will then be 
talking in a representative capacity. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I understand.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, today he is here in his personal 
capacity. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I understand.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But it depends what proposition you want 
and maybe you should get to the proposition so that you 
put it, he knows what you want to, what the proposition is 
20 
and you can respond, but he is right to say the ANC will be 
coming to deal with a lot of those matters, and he is saying 
maybe it might be better to leave that for that time.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But it depends what your proposition 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 211 of 331 
 
finally is, ja.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  Mr Mantashe, let me cut to the 
chase.  Here was Mr Leshabane offering to take care, to 
pay for your security arrangements and Mr Leshabane was 
working for a company BOSASA who has had a contract 
with government, with government.  
 
Did 
you 
not 
find 
it 
strange, 
you 
were 
not 
uncomfortable with that arrangement? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I never have any [indistinct -
00:03:24] at the time.  Leshabane was a young person 
10 
coming with other young people who were in my place.  So 
I would not say he was a representative of BOSASA.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Did it not occur to you that this 
undertaking, this payment for a security arrangement was 
to influence you because BOSASA had contract with 
government? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No.  BOSASA had contracts with a 
number of departments who has had ministers, none of 
those ministers was myself.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now did you know who was, or who 
20 
were the directors and the owners of BOSASA at the time? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not know.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And did you know that Gavin Watson 
was involved in BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, Gavin Watson was, because 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 212 of 331 
 
why I was ... earlier I think in my life there was a [indistinct 
– 00:04:31] when he wanted contact with mines and 
[indistinct – 00:04:36] when he was bribing shop stewards 
and they said no, they are not going to agree to this.  
 
So I knew Gavin was [indistinct -00:04:44]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You say he was trying to bribe shop 
stewards and securities? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Because he was not security.   
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  What was he ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  [indistinct – 00:04:57], take me 
through your questions, please.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He was bringing them for what? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  For contracts for catering at the 
time.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  He was catering in many hostels 
and we fought in many of those hostels working.  So I knew 
him. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see and you knew that he is involved 
in BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I knew that he was the CEO of 
BOSASA, yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you knew that Leshabane is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 213 of 331 
 
working for this company, the company whose CEO had 
previously attempted to bribe the shop stewards? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, no, no.  You see, you see 
presumptions are very dangerous. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, I know.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  They are very dangerous because 
that is why I said earlier.  Young people were coming, they 
were working for various companies.  Amongst them was 
Leshabane, he worked for BOSASA.  Now to [indistinct – 
00:05:55] to scrutinise BOSASA, Leshabane for Bosasa’s 
10 
position, now because of hind sight is unfair to me, it is 
unfair to Leshabane.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I do not think it is unfair to you 
because at the time Leshabane made the offer, you knew 
that he works for a company which is headed by someone, 
who on a number of occasions according to you had 
attempted to bribe shop stewards. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He was working for ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  He was running them. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He was working for a company led by 
this corrupt person.  Were you not concerned about that 
this could be also a bribe? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No.  There were one thing that did 
not worry me, is that the one thing I know, I am not 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 214 of 331 
 
amenable to bribes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am known for that then, I am 
known for that now.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, and then in order to avoid that I 
am sure, you would offer ... you would not take any person 
that you do not pay for.  Am I correct?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No.  When you run a project and 
in a collective situation of a similar arrangement people 
make contributions, it happens from time to time, I 
10 
contribute to many of such projects.  For example, if the 
board goes for [indistinct – 00:07:19] and I give them a 
cow, and this happened there, that is not a bribe.  
 
That is how we relate with one another in a social 
arrangement at same level. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And even now Mr Mantashe, if someone 
gives you a present and you know the background of the 
person, you would refuse to those presents? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, if I am having a present now, 
whether I know the background or not, I declare now I am a 
20 
minister. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you would refuse some of the 
presents if you know the background of the giver, am I 
right? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes, yes.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 215 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now you say Gavin Watson, I suppose 
he also had ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I never dealt with Gavin Watson. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, no I am not saying you dealt with 
him. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, you are telling that Gavin 
Watson, in this space he does not feature.  I did not have 
any interaction with Gavin Watson on this matter.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I have not gone there.  You said you 
have met him.   
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You knew him, you have met him  
...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I met him many years, yes I know 
him. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, I understand he also had a claim 
name, he adopted a claim name.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  What claim name did he have? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not know.  If you know that he 
20 
has the claim name, tell us.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Do you know whether he had a claim 
name or not? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Eh ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 216 of 331 
 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
The 
reason 
I 
am 
asking 
this 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, do you want to focus on the issues. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The reason I am asking this is, 
[indistinct – 00:08:50] evidence that he met, you met him 
at your farm whilst he was installing security equipment at 
your farm.  Remember that?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I write that in a statement, yes.  
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And he, you said to him that he must 
thank, he must thank Gavin and you used Gavin’s claim 
name.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Now Le Roux should elaborate on 
that evidence.  That is not my evidence.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Let us concentrate on that.  Did you 
meet Mr le Roux at your farm whilst he was installing the 
...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I say I have read about that in his 
statement.  
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  If I saw him working there, then 
we not [indistinct -00:09:47], but we never had a meeting 
with him alone at my place.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Did you see him working there? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 217 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I read that in his evidence.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You have said that.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  And I am saying I am not 
disputing it.  I went to my place and the cameras were 
installed, I would have seen people watching. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Did you speak to him whilst he was at 
your farm? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No.  I do not remember speaking 
to him.  I read that in his evidence.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you saw in his evidence, in his 
10 
affidavit that you said you must, you should ... he ... you 
said to him that he must thank Gavin and he said 
[indistinct – 00:10:37], using his claim name.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  The reason why I want to 
cross-examine Le Roux is because he should elaborate on 
that, not me.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, he explained his side of the story. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let me say Mr Mantashe, you may 
recall or you might not recall whether you had such a 
conversation with Mr le Roux.   
20 
MINISTER 
MANTASHE: 
 
I 
do 
not 
remember 
that 
conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So I think you are saying you are 
not disputing it, but you cannot remember it and you would 
like Mr le Roux to elaborate on it.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 218 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is why you would like an 
opportunity to cross-examine him.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right?  Okay.  I think Mr Notshe 
wanted to establish whether you are disputing it in the 
sense of saying no, I have a clear recollection, I have 
never had such a conversation with Mr le Roux or whether 
you are saying I may or I may not have, but I do not 
remember.  
10 
 
I would like more details. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think what you are saying is the 
latter. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, what I am saying is there is a 
difference between meeting Le Roux and seeing people 
working and I talked with them as I walked in.  Big 
difference, and I cannot dispute that.  That is what I am 
saying.  
CHAIRPERSON:  That part, ja.  
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Ja, but having sit together with Le 
Roux it never happened.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But is it possible that the words he 
attribute to you, may have been said in what you ... may 
have been said by you in what you do not consider to have 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 219 of 331 
 
been a meeting that you were walking maybe to your house 
or out of your house, you may have said that.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not remember.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not remember. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Those words. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe?   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But you would remember whether you 
had a red FJ Toyota Cruiser car at that time? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Come again? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But you would remember whether you 
had a red FJ Toyota Cruiser car at that time.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I know that guy.  I do not need to 
remember.  I had a car, it was my car.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You remember having a car like that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not remember I had it.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  So Le Roux is correct that you 
arrived at your premises driving a red FJ Toyota Cruiser 
car.  He is correct about that? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I arrived at my place from time to 
time, driving any car that I have.  I arrived at my place, I 
do go home.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And do you, did you know that Mr Gavin 
Watson’s claim name of Scally or as I think it is Secaly.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 220 of 331 
 
You know something about that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not know.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  That I do not know.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now you do not know ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  [indistinct -00:14:15] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I beg your pardon, I missed that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  There will be no Gavin who is 
Skalie.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh, I see.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe, how is it spelt there? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well, Mr Le Roux is spelling it as 
SCALLY.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Sorry? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  SCALLY, Scally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then I say, I say to the witness I 
read to the name Secaly. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Oh, 
well 
now 
you 
have 
raised 
...[intervenes]  
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am saying, Gavin was never 
known as Scally, not unless he has been given another 
claim name by other people. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
you 
do 
not 
know 
any 
name 
associated with him which is spelt the way that Mr Notshe 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 221 of 331 
 
has indicated? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  It is not Secaly.  It is not close to 
that.  I know that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Gavin Watson was given a claim 
name ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Not that one.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And, but he gave the spelling SCALLY. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that come anywhere near what you 
know to be his claim name? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  [indistinct – 00:15:28], claim name 
no.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  What was his claim name, Mr Watson? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  People, you see you want me to 
give you information to use it against me, you know. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, look you must understand Mr 
Mantashe I am not here ...[intervenes]  
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am saying, I am saying Gavin 
Watson had a claim name, it is not close to Secaly. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, I am asking you what was the claim 
name.  You have got to tell the commission.  You are 
assisting the commission to get to the truth of things.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 222 of 331 
 
Assisted by telling what was Gavin Watson’s claim name.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Gavin Watson was known as 
Radebe 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  As? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Radebe.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Not Secaly or something closer? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes, nothing close to that.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Look, earlier on you said you do 
know Gavin Watson's claim name, that you have forgotten 
10 
it. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I have not forgotten it.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I did not say that.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I also thought he, I do not remember 
him saying he did not know it.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He said Watson does not have a claim 
name.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I did not say it, sorry.  You can go 
20 
to answer it.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well, you ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I did not say that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Look, it does not matter now.  You have 
admitted he has a claim name and it is Radebe. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 223 of 331 
 
MINISTER 
MANTASHE: 
 
I 
am 
not 
admitting, 
I 
am 
confirming.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I confirmed earlier.  I am just 
giving you the claim name now.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Now ...[intervenes]  
UNKNOWN:  Jessy J, may I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
UNKNOWN:  Yes, I am trying to follow what propositions 
are being put to Mr Mantashe, all these questions about Mr 
10 
Watson’s claim name, the car that he owned.  You know, I 
am really battling to follow what is it that Mr Notshe is 
exploring with the witness.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think what he was exploring with regard 
to Mr Gavin Watson’s claim name and the type and colour 
of the car that Mr Mantashe may have used on the 
particular occasion, is to check whether the version put up 
by Mr le Roux namely of saying that Mr Mantashe came to I 
think one of the properties in the Eastern Cape on one of 
the occasions that Mr le Roux and his team were working 
20 
there, and he was in the car that was described by Mr 
Notshe, and he was also I think exploring whether Mr 
Mantashe disputes the version put up by Mr le Roux, that 
he used the word that Mr Notshe read out as the claim 
name for Mr Gavin, I think he was seeking to see to what 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 224 of 331 
 
extent Mr Mantashe was disputing that version and I think 
Mr Mantashe has said well, I do not remember having, I do 
not remember meeting Mr Le Roux or I did not have a 
meeting, but I may have come to the property and saw, 
seen people installing and I may have greeted them and 
said something.  
 
But, and he said well, I may have come in the car 
that he describes because I did have such a car and but he 
has said I think he did not use the name, the so called 
claim name that has been put into the affidavit by Mr Le 
10 
Roux.  
 
So I think that is what he was doing and I think over 
time we, that part seems to me to be at the tail end.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
UNKNOWN:  Thank you Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay alright.  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mantashe, if you say something we 
will see you. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am saying something.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you are back.  Yes, Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now you confirm, you do confirm now 
that you do not know because of the Boksburg installation 
and installations at your two properties in the Eastern 
Cape, am I correct? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 225 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes, you are correct.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you never saw any invoices 
relating to that, am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Nobody sent me any invoice.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I beg your pardon? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Nobody sent me an invoice.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You have never seen the invoice? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Nobody sent me invoice.  I cannot 
see an invoice, unless they are sent to me.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Now you do not know, in the end 
10 
you do not know how much those installations cost? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not know.  I am reading it in 
the affidavit.  That was very contradictory.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now you saw the affidavit of Richard le 
Roux where he gave details of the expenses.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I have seen Richard le Roux.  I 
have also seen ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Agrizzi. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Leshabane. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Now let us look at that.  Did 
20 
Leshabane’s evidence contain details of invoices and the 
amounts for each item? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He merely says it could not have been, 
am I right? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 226 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And Le Roux gives details of invoices, 
of what, how much and how much each item costs, am I 
correct?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  How can you then dispute the evidence 
of Le Roux when you do not know how much it cost and the 
other evidence of Leshabane does not give details? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I cannot dispute because I had no 
dealings with Le Roux.  Nor did I have dealings with 
10 
Agrizzi.  I had dealings with Leshabane.  So if there were 
any statements to be sent, I would imagine that Le Roux 
would send it to Leshabane.  
 
If Leshabane says it was, I would have installed 
these cameras as my own cost, I would imagine that the 
statement and invoices will go to Leshabane.  So I cannot 
dispute anything.  All I am saying is that a dispute between 
Le Roux and Agrizzi which almost doubled the costs, looks 
suspicious.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And that is the high water mark of the 
20 
case, that it looks suspicious but you cannot say that is not 
the expense. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I cannot because I am not 
invoices.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I beg your pardon? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 227 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am not invoices.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So the high water mark of your case, I 
am saying the high water mark of your evidence is that you 
do not know how much it costs, you cannot dispute the 
evidence of Le Roux of how much it cost.  Am I correct?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I do not know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  He has explained it Mr Notshe.  He has 
explained exactly what you are saying.  He has said he 
cannot dispute what Mr Richard le Roux says, because he 
did not deal with him.  He dealt with Mr Leshabane.  He 
10 
has noted that Mr Leshabane disputes those figures and he 
has noted what he says is contradictions and he says even 
that, it seems to him that the figures given by Mr le Roux 
are suspicious.  
 
Have I summarised your position correctly? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  That is the summary Mr Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now you are relying on the, when you 
are saying Mr Leshabane disputes this, you are relying on 
his confirmatory affidavit, am I correct? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Now his confirmatory affidavit, 
will you confirm for the commission, appears on page 249 
to 253.  Am I correct?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  249, yes.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 228 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then 250 that is the affidavit and then 
there are annexures.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And in paragraph 5 of his affidavit he 
says, I am reading paragraph 5 on page 250.  He says: 
 
“In his evidence Mr le Roux estimated the cost 
to be three hundred thousand.  I dispute the 
said cost estimate.  I hereby attach invoice 
from supplier of the security equipment as 
Annexures G4 to G6.” 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then the annexures, they are on 
251, 252, 253.  Am I correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now is Leshabane, I know you cannot 
testify for him.  But when he explained this to you, are 
these the invoices that were issued to Le Roux at the time? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I would not know the dealings 
between Leshabane and Le Roux.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I beg your pardon? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I would not know the dealings 
between Leshabane and Le Roux.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see, but when you talked to him, was 
this the quotation that was given to Le Roux regarding the 
installations at your place? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 229 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Leshabane is making a sworn 
affidavit to the commission and he attaches invoices.  That 
is his version of the submission. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You do not know about this? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I cannot know.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You never asked him what are these 
invoices for? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No, why should I? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Because there is evidence of the 
amount of, that was expended on your properties and you 
10 
are 
asking 
Leshabane 
is 
this 
expenditure 
correct?  
Leshabane produces some invoices.  Did you ask him are 
these the invoices that were given to Le Roux?   
MINISTER 
MANTASHE: 
 
Leshabane 
made 
a 
sworn 
statement ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  To the commission.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:  He attaches invoices, and saying 
the 
quotation 
by 
both 
Le 
Roux 
and 
Agrizzi 
are 
20 
misrepresenting the [indistinct – 00:27:59].  Now that is his 
version.  I am dealing with him, I am not dealing with the 
others.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is your understanding that the invoices 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 230 of 331 
 
that we put up, that of Mr Leshabane, related to both to all 
the properties, Boksburg and the Eastern Cape or only the 
one 
of 
them, 
namely 
Boksburg. 
 
What 
was 
your 
understanding of what they covered? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  My assumption is that this is the 
cost of cameras.  Whether they are installed in Boksburg, 
or they are installed in the Eastern Cape.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I see that in his affidavit, he seems 
to talk about residents as opposed to residences where, in 
paragraph 4 which is at page 250, he says: 
10 
 
“I 
further 
confirm 
that 
Mr 
le 
Roux 
has 
misrepresented the facts about this security 
upgrades at the Mantashe residence, and has 
inflated the cost of these.” 
 
It may well be that he might need to explain.  You 
see that part?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I see that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Alright, Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And I also notice that what he has put 
up are 2019 quotations.  Whereas we know that this was, 
20 
the work was done in 2015 and 2016.  Did you notice that?   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Did you notice that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes, I see.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Did you ever ask him where are the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 231 of 331 
 
2015 and 2016 ...[intervenes]  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No I was not in a position to 
cross-examine Leshabane.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do not cross-examine, that is 
not how we relate. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh I see.   Chair I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No further questions. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Let me – before I say that, I do not 
10 
want to be dismissed by Ms Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, you want to consult with her? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   My instructing attorney says I can 
stop. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She confirms that you are right? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   She says I can stop now, thank you 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, Mr Mantashe, Mr Notshe has no 
further questions but it is possible that your counsel might 
wish to re-examine if he thinks there are things that he 
20 
would like to be clarified. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am going to give him the 
opportunity if he wishes to, he might not have re-
examination but he might have.  Mr Nalane what is your 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 232 of 331 
 
position, would you like to re-examine? 
ADV NALANE SC:  Thank you Chair I have a few questions 
just to clarify a few points with Mr Mantashe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, go ahead. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you, Mr Mantashe I am sure you 
are familiar with the terms of reference of this Commission. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I am. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And at the time when the security 
equipment was installed at your premises you were not in 
National Minister of government, correct?  
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   You were not an office bearer in any 
State institution, correct?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct.  
ADV NALANE SC:   You were not an office bearer in any 
organ of State or a director or a Board of a State owned 
enterprise? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Currently, you are a Minister of 
government? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I am a Minister, in government 
now. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And currently, as you said, you are 
bound by different laws the Executive Fixed Act, for 
instance.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 233 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I am.  
ADV NALANE SC:   And you have to declare gifts that you 
receive, because you are a Minister? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I do declare even a pen. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you, at the time you were, as 
you say, the Secretary General of an NGO called the ANC. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I cannot hear you. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Did you hear me?  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, he did not hear the question.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, Mr Mantashe you said that at the 
10 
time when this equipment was given to you, you were the 
Secretary General of an NGO called the ANC, correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Now, as I listened to some of the 
questions which were put to you, the suggestion is that you 
should have been at your guard if any of us have cameras 
or whatever was made by Mr Leshabane that was some of 
the questions put to you, correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, that is correct the line of 
questions, yes. 
20 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, you were asked, did you know 
how much she earned, correct?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I was asked that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, now, just clarify again, briefly, 
what your relationship with Mr Leshabane at the relevant 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 234 of 331 
 
time was? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I described Papa Leshabane as a 
family friend because he was a friend to my son in law, by 
extension became a friend to my children and many others, 
and when they come to me, they will come with many other 
friends from Limpopo because the marriage of my daughter 
cut across tribes to [Bushba tribes and I was a Talla[?]  
and we would develop a relationship which was a family 
relationship in that way, you know. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And it was suggested to you that you 
10 
should have been on your guard because Mr Leshabane 
worked for BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, that was a question. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Now, did you ever meet with Mr 
Agrizzi? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I do not remember meeting 
Agrizzi even when I see him in pictures, I do not have any 
recollection of seeing the man. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay, so would it be correct that you 
have never discussed any business or maybe have you 
20 
ever discussed any business of BOSASA with Mr Agrizzi? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I never discussed anything 
with Mr Agrizzi. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And have you ever discussed any 
business of BOSASA with Mr Watson? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 235 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I never discussed business of 
BOSASA with Mr Watson. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Because you would have seen in one 
of the affidavits of Mr Agrizzi he suggests that you were 
part of what they called the special project, do you recall 
that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I recall that.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, did you have any knowledge that 
some people in BOSASA call you a special project? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I did not know that. 
10 
ADV NALANE SC:   And then what he also suggests is that 
Mr Agrizzi is that Gavin Watson impressed upon him that is 
Mr Agrizzi the vital role that Mantashe played in assisting 
BOSASA.  Have you ever assisted BOSASA in anything? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I never assisted BOSASA with 
anything, as I was recording earlier is that the only thing I 
recall, were running battles much earlier in my life. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And he also says that you Mr 
Mantashe were a good connection and needed to be looked 
after.  Did you know that somebody at BOSASA was 
20 
looking after you as Mr Agrizzi suggests? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Nobody, was looking after me 
from BOSASA, there was nothing I was receiving from 
BOSASA. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And that you were a person of great 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 236 of 331 
 
influence and regarding government sectors that were 
highly placed with the trade unions and in government. 
That is why see what Mr Watson discussed that you should 
be looked after, then you can comment 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It was then, then they discovered 
that I was a general secretary, I was Chairperson of the 
Communist Party and therefore the influence that they 
think thereof is an assumption. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And you say upon Mr Leshabane is a 
family friend, more a friend of your children? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Have you ever made any business 
favour, done any business with Mr Leshabane? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I would not, I was never asked 
for a business favour. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And you have said that, and let us 
come to the security features.  It was suggested to you but 
you should have known that somebody had installed this 
security equipment that you should therefore have asked 
how much it cost, do you recall that? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I recall that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And also, Mr Le Roux has a long list of 
equipment that he says he installed at your various 
properties, correct?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I saw the list. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 237 of 331 
 
ADV NALANE SC:   To your knowledge insofar as you have 
observed what equipment was installed at your house in 
the form of security at the instance of Mr Leshabane? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I am not a security expert, but I 
know that cameras were installed and I read somewhere 
about intercom and I know that there is no intercom 
because there is no fence to install that intercom on, but 
cameras were installed, who gave all those cameras, I will 
not be in a position to explain. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And have you ever shown any member 
10 
of the public these cameras which were installed at your 
premises in Boksburg, in your area? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I did take the media when the 
whole story emerged, I talked to the media, I said here are 
those cameras have a look at them and earlier that security 
upgrade is non-existent to this camera. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And you said there was some people 
who were looking after your security, to be Mzonke, 
correct?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Mzonke was the head of my 
20 
security.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, and it was suggested to you that 
we should have actually have probed and asked further 
how much do these things cost, you recall that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I recall that. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 238 of 331 
 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, any further comments you wish to 
make on that line of questions put to you? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, Mzonke and Leshabane 
agreed I would give you cameras at my own cost so I would 
not go beyond that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And also you were taken to your – in 
that context you were also asked about the affidavit which 
you deposed to which appears on page 238.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, 238 yes.   
ADV NALANE SC:   It was asked of you who paid for the 
10 
cameras, did you ask you recall that?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I recall that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   It was asked of you do you know how 
much they cost, do you recall that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I recall that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, now in your affidavit on page 238 
I just want you to read paragraphs 22 and 23. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   22 and 23? 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is on page 239.  
20 
ADV NALANE SC:   Page 238, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On my bundle…[intervene] 
ADV NALANE SC:   Is it on 239? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On my bundle it is on 239. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 239 of 331 
 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay fine, proceed Mr Mantashe. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, in that paragraph, I am 
making an emphasis on the distinction between the so 
called special project and my project.  All those special 
projects were given code names and my project was not 
given a code name, it was the called Project Mantashe.  So 
what is in 22: 
“That my security upgrades was the only project 
which was not given a secret project code.  Mr Le 
Roux himself referred to it as Project Mantashe. 
10 
This 
is 
indicative 
that 
there 
was 
no 
malice 
associated with the security upgrades at my place 
and further informed that there was never an 
agreement with the executive of BOSASA Agrizzi 
and Watson regarding security upgrades at my 
portfolio.  Papa made the decision and proceeded 
with the security upgrade out of his own.” 
ADV NALANE SC:   Ja, so you are saying it is Papa out of 
his own volition? Who proceeded with the upgrades, 
correct?  
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, Mr Nalane. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Mr Mantashe, can you hear me? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And you say Mr Leshabane has 
confirmed this under oath? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 240 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. he has. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And at the time when the security 
equipment was given to you 2013, 2016 you say you had 
no reason to believe one day you will be answering these 
questions? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Mr Mantashe? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Can you hear me now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   He heard you and he responded. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you.  Now if we look at the - I 
10 
want you to turn to, I think it is page 529. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Come again? 
ADV NALANE SC:   529. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, and this is an affidavit deposed to 
by Mr Richard Le Roux.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, and it is part of his affidavit 
substantiating why he thinks the cost was R300 000,00, do 
you recall that? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Now he attaches a whole lot of 
invoices and statements to his affidavit to try and match as 
he says some of this cost to you.  But if you can go to 
page 524 of the summary. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 241 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I have got that. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Ja, so he says at paragraph 114. Can 
you read that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   It says: 
“I am unable to unable to link the following work 
performed at present premises for invoices to the 
value of R227 206,00 and 18 credit notes to the 
value of R59 855,51 adjustment notes to the value 
of R300 429,39.” 
ADV NALANE SC:   Ja, and then paragraph 115? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   “In performance of the above  
exercise to arrive at an estimated per installation I 
have kept the technicians rate constant throughout 
the 
document 
for 
consistently 
purpose 
only, 
although the rates would have increased over the 
years.  I am doing so, I have acted on the side of 
caution and calculated the approximate cost on a 
low to have an exact.  Once I have to I have 
estimated the days taken to perform the installation 
on what I consider to be the minimum time that it 
20 
could have been taken to perform the installation 
and although certain invoices in the unidentified 
category above may have been for work done at the 
identified properties referred to in the affidavit.  I 
have been cautious to only allocate the invoice to a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 242 of 331 
 
property where this is clear to me from the date and 
the invoices.” 
ADV NALANE SC:   Ja, so he says he is estimating, he is 
trying to match invoices to premises.  Some invoices he 
cannot match to any premises, correct.  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is what he says, yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:  There is a bit of a delay in the audio, 
Mr Mantashe did you hear what I said? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:    Yes, I am hearing you. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he did respond. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you, and then you answer? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   I say that is what he said. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you very much, and he says the 
cost of your premises is R300 000,00? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Mr Agrizzi says it is R650 000,00? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Correct. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Mr Leshabane says it cannot be more 
than 30,40 or 50 or R70 000,00? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   That is what Mr Leshabane says. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And they work for BOSASA? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, correct.  
ADV NALANE SC:   I will not take you to the details of the 
invoices appearing from 532 but perhaps well because they 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 243 of 331 
 
say it on its own but can we just look at one.  One or two 
items appear in the page 532. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   You see the first item what is that, the 
first item with a date? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   532? 
ADV NALANE SC:  Yes, the date is 13/02/2015, do you see 
that? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, I see it.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, you say the security the security 
10 
equipment to your premises 2013 and 2016, correct?  
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, I need not take you through out to 
the documents but that is just illustrative of the confusion 
in the estimates or whatever the called, calculations here.  
Now, I want to round up now Mr Mantashe I have come 
across a book with inscription by Mr Agrizzi and he 
describes the security equipment installed at your house 
as a bribe. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NALANE SC:   But you say you have never met Mr 
Agrizzi in your life, correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Ja, I have never met him. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, he has never spoken to you about 
the security equipment at your house has he? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 244 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   He has never spoken to me about 
it. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And yet he writes in a book that you 
have taken a bribe for some cameras, your comment? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, that is what he writes and 
obviously, he would have elaborated bribe for what. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And it was suggested to you that 
because you are the Secretary General of the ANC you had 
enormous influence in government in the appointment of 
Ministers, and perhaps you would have done some favours 
10 
for BOSASA, any comment? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I did not do any favour for 
BOSASA and I had no influence on the work of Ministers, I 
am a Minister now I know how irritating it would be to have 
officials from Luthili House coming to Ministers. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, is there anything else that you 
wish to add to before we end off, sir? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   My last comment is, and I am 
here before the Commission for the period I was not in 
government, where I held no office.  I was not working in a 
20 
State institution but I am here now and there is a big effort 
to make me one of the many and reality of the matter is 
that my project even in their books is not co-planned 
because it was not a bribe, because not a special project 
that is all I can say. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 245 of 331 
 
ADV NALANE SC:   Were subpoenaed to appear before the 
Commission? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, I offered to come. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are those all your questions? 
ADV NALANE SC:   DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   I almost and now, but because I am 
not with my attorney I see she sent me a message.  Can I 
mute for just one minute and just find out if she wants me 
10 
to say anything else and then I can address it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is alright.  
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you.  DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Yes, I am back and I have got one last 
question.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NALANE SC:   And then we conclude.   Mr Mantashe 
as you can appreciate, this is a State Capture Commission 
and the suggestion and accusations and the things that 
20 
have been said about you by Mr Agrizzi, Mr Le Roux might 
suggest that you were part of State Capture or you aided 
and abetted to help State Capture.  Do you have any 
comment in that regard? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   As - I can explain to you that the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 246 of 331 
 
concept 
corporate 
capture 
and 
the 
State 
Capture 
originated because we thought it right and we started a 
discussion within the ANC to start a process that will 
actually dispel this notion and try to address the depth of 
it. 
And that is why we have repeatedly committed 
ourselves to supporting the Commission with replicated 
research so that we want the Commission because it is 
through this Commission that depth will be unearthed and 
only when unearth it then you can claim it.  So I could not 
10 
assist State Capture in any way. 
ADV NALANE SC:   Thank you.  DCJ, thank you for the 
opportunity, those are the questions for Mr Mantashe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no thank you, Mr Mantashe I might 
have just one or few questions but before I put them, you 
probably are aware that sometimes people say parents 
should be careful when they give a name to their child 
because the child might end up being what the name says. 
And you would have some parents who will name 
their child maybe which [speaking in vernacular] or lawyer 
20 
in isiZulu or some would call their child professor, and 
some would call the child doctor.  So I saw that when you 
were muted, the initials that came up on the screen was Mr 
SG Mantashe so I wondered whether when you became 
Secretary General of the ANC it had anything to do with 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 247 of 331 
 
your initials? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   No, it nothing to do maybe it is 
just some sign.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I know that is what they represent 
but it was quite interesting and because the abbreviation 
for Secretary General is SG as well and your initials are 
SG. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what seems to emerge from your 
evidence and the evidence of Mr Agrizzi and the evidence 
10 
of Mr Le Roux seems to be the following and I am going to 
mention this to give you an opportunity to say whether you 
agree that that is how the evidence seems to emerge.  
It would seem to me that one, Mr Agrizzi and Mr Richard Le 
Roux say that it was BOSASA employees or people who 
were sent by BOSASA, who made installations, security 
installations in your properties and it seems to me that you 
are not in a position to dispute whether that is so, all you 
say is you were told that Mr Leshabane would take care of 
the costs for the security cameras, is that correct? 
20 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  That is correct though in the 
evidence of Agrizzi he contracted out this policy then 
BOSASA and other people from BOSASA dispute that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  So what you are summarising is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 248 of 331 
 
correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And whether as a matter of fact the 
work done and the cameras that were installed were paid for 
by Mr Leshabane from his own pocket or whether the 
payments came from BOSASA is something that you have no 
personal knowledge of, is that correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I have no personal knowledge of 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I have no personal knowledge of 
10 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  The point you make is simply 
that your knowledge was Mr Leshabane a family friend 
offered to install cameras of better quality at the Boksburg 
property he said that would be at his own cost.  You agreed 
and subsequently you understood that that arrangement was 
extended to your Eastern Cape properties between him and 
your security advisor Mr Mzonke is that correct? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  No those are the things 
20 
that I wanted to just confirm.  I propose to release Mr 
Mantashe now  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just before that Chair can I just read two 
things? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 249 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I just want to point them out Mr 
Mantashe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Or for comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   
1. Mr Montashe is, you confirm that in his – when Mr Le 
Roux was reply – when he has replied to your affidavit 
he did state that you had a code name BOSASA GM.  
You do confirm that? 
10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Come again I do not understand 
that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You confirm that – will you confirm that 
Mr Le Roux filed an affidavit answering your founding 
affidavit, am I right? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry I think what you should do Mr Notshe 
maybe put to him what Mr Le Roux says and then… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Fine Mr Le Roux in his answering 
affidavit said you were given a code name – you had a code 
name GM. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the question is whether you recall 
seeing that in his affidavit Mr Mantashe? 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No in his affidavit he said they gave 
my project a project name, Project Mantashe.  That is what 
they say themselves I do not know how did they code name 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 250 of 331 
 
my project but they said they code named that project 
Project Mantashe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  On page 257 paragraph 10 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  257 – 257. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Okay I am almost there.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You see in paragraph 10 the penultimate 
paragraph, on paragraph 10 it says: 
“I confirm that I referred to the – to it as 
Project Mantashe but the correct name for 
10 
the special project was in fact Project GM.” 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Oh (inaudible) there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he says that is what it says. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  That is what it says. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what is your – what I think you were 
talking about Mr Notshe you were saying he says that is the 
code name. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is not in the – in the affidavit that 
is the code name is – that he says so but he gives what they 
called it.  I do not know whether when one reads elsewhere. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No it is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is consistent with the code names. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 251 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He says the correct name of the project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Was GM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  He says the project was given a  
name GM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he has confirmed. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You see that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he has confirmed that he sees that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then lastly what I want to point out 
10 
on page 330. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No may I respond Chair/ 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes okay please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Can I respond to that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Mr Le Roux in his affidavit says: 
“My project was called Project Mantashe.” 
Now as I am after told he is giving the name Project GM that 
20 
would be my submission. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now please go to page 330 and page 
330 and 331.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 252 of 331 
 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I am at 330 yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  These we will get to these.  These are 
invoices – these are documents that are attached to the 
affidavit of Leshabane.  Now these are clearer copies.  I just 
want to bring your notice at the foot of those pages look at 
the foot it says “Quote expires 28 February 2019”.  You see 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where are you looking – at which page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  330. 
CHAIRPERSON:  330. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And 331. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  At the foot Chair at the very – the very – 
at the foot of – let us start at 330. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  At the foot of 330 the last – the last 
sentence is quotation “Quote expires”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You know the boxes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Are you with me Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not see it but I think if you tell 
me what the point is that will be enough. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  All I want to point out Mr Mantashe is 
that it is clear from this that this was a quotation obtained in 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 253 of 331 
 
2019. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  We have dealt with that Advocate. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You accept that it is a quotation. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  No I said I am repeating what I said 
to you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  I cannot deal with invoices because 
no invoice was sent to me.  So those are internal contact 
issue that I see but whether that is a quotation for 
Leshabane or it is a quotation for Agrizzi I would not have 
10 
first-hand knowledge of that quotation. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I understand.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Mantashe for 
availing yourself to assist the commission.  Thank you very 
much we will – I will now excuse you and thank you to your 
legal team and they are also excused.   
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MINISTER MANTASHE:  Thank you Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you.    We are at nearly 
20 
twenty to eight.  We can take an adjournment a ten minutes 
adjournment.  Is your other witness ready? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Mr Makwetla is here and he is ready to 
testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay we will adjourn for about ten 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 254 of 331 
 
minutes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we will resume. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No fine.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, we are ready Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chairperson, the next witness is 
Mr Thabang Makwetla.  The genesis of the evidence of the 
witness is the testimony of Mr Le Roux wherein he testified 
to the effect that he – there were security installations he 
made to the residence of Mr Makwetla.   
 
And also, the issue of the installations being 
made is not an issue.  The question is the amount and the 
reason and the justification.  Mr Makwetla, Chair, has 
made a special requests.   
20 
 
One.  That we will, because there is no fight 
about the installation, that we will just refer to residence.  
He says for security reasons, he would not want his place 
of residence to put out there in the... 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, of course. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 255 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  And then also.  Where we said, 
even do not mention the residence, we do not even have to 
go... it goes to those – that residence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But the, as I said, the issue of 
installation is not a – the issue – the question of 
installation is not an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The only problem is the amount and 
then also the justification. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then, Mr Makwetla has also 
requested that before he gives evidence, he wishes to 
make a statement but that, Chair, I have explained to him 
will be part of the proceedings, in the sense that, he will 
just start giving and explain to the Commission his 
response to the evidence that is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, the evidence and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So let us get his team, his legal team to 
20 
be put themselves on record. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Okay, sorry, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can do so from where you are if your 
mic is working.   
ADV SEKELE:   Thank you, Chairperson.  My name is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 256 of 331 
 
Advocate Thebogomose Sekele(?).  I am instructed by 
Mhluli Piers and Mzekwa Attorneys.  They go as MPM 
Attorneys.   
ADV SEKELE:   Chairperson, we are indebted to the issue 
around 
the 
sensitivities 
regarding 
the 
security 
of 
Mr Makwetla. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SEKELE:   And the undertaking by the evidence 
leaders that those issues will be kept away from the public 
as far as possible. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja  No, no.  That is fine. 
ADV SEKELE:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Good evening, 
Mr Makwetla. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Good evening, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you for availing 
yourself to come and assist the Commission and for 
availing yourself, you and your legal team, to come to the 
Commission even in the evening to assist the Commission 
to try and finish its work within the timeframe that has 
20 
been imposed on it by the circumstances.  Okay alright.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You want Mr Makwetla to take the oath 
now before you say anything ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, it is better.  Yes, Chair. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 257 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So that we can flow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Administer the oath or affirmation.  You 
may stand Mr Makwetla and switch on your mic. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   My name, it is Thabang Samson Phathakge 
Makwetla. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   Not at all. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   [No audible reply]  
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, 
so help me God. 
20 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
THABANG SAMSON PHATHAKGE MAKWETLA:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  I am checking the 
technicians whether the fact that Mr Makwetla was wearing 
his mask, may have meant that they did not hear you 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 258 of 331 
 
correctly and properly or not? 
TECHNICIANS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay they say it is fine.  They are 
making certain gestures to me.  I read the gestures to say 
they...  Oh, they wanted it to be redone. 
TECHNICIANS:   [No audible reply] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I am sorry Mr Makwetla, we will 
have to redo it.  If you do not mind, please take off your 
mask because there is proper social distancing.   
MR MAKWETLA:   [No audible reply]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   My name, it is Thabang Samson Phathakge 
Makwetla. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No, no objection. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes, I do. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, 
so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 259 of 331 
 
THABANG SAMSON PHATHAKGE MAKWETLA:  (d.s.s) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Okay alright.  You may be 
seated. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I must ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the chair that you are seated on is 
going to be comfortable.  I seem to think other witnesses 
sit on the other one but if you are comfortable there and 
the mic is not far, it is fine, whichever you use.   
MR MAKWETLA:   It is only that it looked worn-out Deputy 
Chief Justice. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  No, you ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:   I thought the other one ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can sit on the other one as long 
as you will be able to speak closer to the mic, ja.  Okay 
alright.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I must declare up front. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is the fact that there are called two 
Samson’s today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is not meant to intimidate the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is just a coincidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 260 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The – this evidence is contained in 
BOSASA Bundle 3 and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, hang on.  I see that Mr Makwetla, 
you have put on your mask again.   
MR MAKWETLA:   I must take it off? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, if you can be heard clearly with 
it on, we would not mind but what has happened in the past 
is that they say they cannot hear it clearly but we have 
10 
taken it like that because there is proper social distancing.  
There should be no problem.  Are you comfortable with 
that? 
MR MAKWETLA:   That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Yes, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, as the evidence is in BOSASA 
Bundle 3 and it starts at page 124 and Exhibit T-31.  
Mr Makwetla, can I take you to that?  It is Exhibit T-31.  Do 
you have it in front of you? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And at the left-hand corner, at the top 
left-hand corner is written BOSASA-124 in black. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes, I can see that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So we will be using those numbers.  
Although you may just use the number 124 and the – at the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 261 of 331 
 
numbers.  So when we refer to a page number, we will be 
using 
that. 
 
Now 
before 
we 
started 
– 
before 
the 
Commission started this afternoon, you informed me that 
you wish to read out the statement that you made when 
this 
issue 
of 
the 
installation 
came 
up 
before 
the 
Commission.  You confirm that? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes, I confirm that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you have a copy thereof in front of 
you, you wish to read out? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes, I have the copy with me. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Can I ask you to read that out into the 
record.  And then, can you then proceed from that to 
explain to the Chairperson and the Commission as to what 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe it is better that he reads it, 
finishes it, and then ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He explains. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I have been assured by Mr Notshe that 
20 
the statement that you want to read does not implicate 
anybody and anything.  So on that assurance, I am happy 
to let you read it. 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, it does not Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 262 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I made a copy for you and to be 
handed up to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Proceed Mr Makwetla. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may proceed, ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, thank you very much for the 
opportunity, Deputy Chief Justice.  I just thought that it 
would possible to assist or to provide a premise from 
which, in submitting my evidence, I move from and it was 
only 
because, 
as 
I 
was 
going 
through 
the 
files 
of 
10 
correspondence around this matter, preparing to come 
before the Commission, I came across the statement, the 
media statement that I released just two years ago.  
Actually, exactly two years ago.   
 
And I thought that it would be helpful to serve as 
a 
context, 
that 
the 
Commission 
should 
have 
in 
interrogating the evidence, submitted.  Two years ago I 
made this statement to the effect that the unfolding 
testimonies 
before 
the 
State 
Capture 
Commission, 
I 
indeed, a welcome relief by its very nature and magnitude 
20 
that this Commission must be celebrated as a reassurance 
that the foundation of our democracy is strong and 
dependable. 
 
Not even mature Western democracies, I believe, 
have expected to such as we are witnessing in the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 263 of 331 
 
promotion of transparency and public affairs.  All those 
who believe in the devastation corruption can lead to and 
its incompatibility with development and freedom.   
 
We must do everything to ensure that this 
Commission succeeds.  In this regard, we must all be 
vigilant to guard against any attempts to abuse or hijack 
this Commission for other goals for which it was not 
established for.   
 
I have submitted a request as far I said then to 
appear before the Commission and I trust that this 
10 
application would be granted.  This is not because my 
name 
has 
been 
mentioned 
in 
the 
Commission’s 
proceedings.  That is important.   
 
However, it has always been my conviction to 
make a modest contribution towards efforts to arrest the 
threads of a backward slide in our national transformation 
agenda. 
 
We 
have 
to 
combat 
corruption 
in 
all 
its 
manifestations, if the dream of those who gave their lives 
generously for this country to be free, must not lay in 
ruins.   
20 
 
I wish to indicate that the evidence submitted 
before this Commission that an electric fence and an alarm 
system were installed at my home by BOSASA is not new.  
That is what I said then.  I have previously responded to it 
and will deal with it again when I appear before the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 264 of 331 
 
Commission on the date that I am granted audience.  That 
is what I said then.   
 
And I thought that this would be appropriate for 
the Commission to note what my attitude is in relation to 
the Commission’s work and the evidence that I have 
shared.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you, Mr Makwetla.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You confirm that you then gave a 
sworn 
statement, 
explaining 
and 
responding 
to 
the 
evidence of Le Roux? 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   I confirm that I submitted, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And in your previous – the evidence 
and the statement of Le Roux was that, there were 
installations, security installations made at your house in 
2016.  And can you – in these were done because he was 
contracted by BOSASA to do that.  And can you explain to 
the Chairperson how it came about that this work was done 
at your place? 
MR MAKWETLA:   The statement by Richard le Roux 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   ...is to me accurate, generally, about 
the job that was done by BOSASA at my house. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, Mr Makwetla.  Although I ask 
you questions, you addressing your ...[intervenes]  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 265 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:   I am ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  So I...  It can get confusing 
because I am asking you questions but you are talking to 
the Chairperson.  But proceed. 
MR MAKWETLA:   The story starts in 2015.  I see that in 
all the correspondence, including the correspondence, the 
first... to the Parliamentary Ethics Committee.  It says this 
was in 2016.  I have subsequently realised that that is 
actually inaccurate.  This was in 2015, the beginning of 
2015.   
10 
 
What happened is that I got a call from Gavin 
Watson, the CEO of BOSASA requesting an urgent meeting 
to which I obliged and we met.   
 
He raised his concerns and stressed that the 
Department 
of 
Correctional 
Services 
been 
nudge 
to 
understand the industry – and this was in relation to the 
catering industry that was contracted to support the 
department or to provide services to the department, was 
actually on a verge of a crisis.  And that the adjustment to 
the pricing in terms of rates in their contract was such that 
20 
the service they are providing was not sustainable.   
 
At that meeting, because it was the beginning of 
the 
year, 
after 
we 
have 
discussed 
his 
concern, 
we 
proceeded, of course, to talk about the first decision that 
were emerging from and he asked me how I was my festive 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 266 of 331 
 
season and I explained to him that I had a good time, I was 
in Cape Town.   
 
However, there is that bad thing that I came 
back to a house that was a burglary, that was broken into 
my house here in Johannesburg.  And that the other did not 
find company to come and install an electric fence to the 
house because my house has a very high perimeter wall 
but I felt that what there was lacking is a security fence.  
And I wanted a service provider that could install an 
electric fence for me.   
10 
 
At the time I could find one because it was in the 
beginning of the year and the companies that I have tried 
from the Yellow Pages were all still not, you know, back in 
operation at the time.  And then he said to me:  No, we can 
actually sort out that for you very quickly.   
 
And I was pleasantly surprised because I had 
been to BOSASA in December, just at the end of the year 
but it just ended, for the first time to familiarise myself with 
the operations of BOSASA and the things that they were 
doing for the Department of Correctional Services.   
20 
 
And I was not aware that they were in all in 
home security.  I knew that they were involved in security 
and catering and their security was at a high level because 
with 
Correctional 
Services, 
their 
security 
involve 
for 
providing 
the 
technologies 
that 
were 
employed 
or 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 267 of 331 
 
controlling 
movement 
inside 
a 
correctional 
services 
themselves.   
 
The electronic control of access and also the 
design of the perimeter fences around our correctional 
centres much as it will be that they were not done by his 
company but it was his company that came with that design 
and the whole, you know, approach to perimeter, security 
around correctional services.   
 
You will have observe, Deputy Chief Justice, that 
on most many of our big correctional centres, they have 
10 
this perimeter fences that are bent inwards.  That is what 
they designed and he said they sent some of their, I mean, 
engineers to the US and they came back with that design.   
 
So I never thought that they would be involved, 
you know, security for houses.  So when he said to me 
that:  No, no, no.  We do home security.  We can do that 
for you.  I was very, you know, pleased and I asked him to 
send a team to my place to do an evaluation and to provide 
me with a quotation and that is when we parted.   
 
I now do not remember whether it was how many 
20 
weeks, a week or two weeks, when I came back to the 
house to come as I usually do, once I took... you know, 
section at the house.  That I found that they had actually 
started installing security features at my house and they 
were almost at the end.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 268 of 331 
 
 
The only reason they did not finish their work is 
because they did not have access into the house.  And I 
then arranged with my son, because during the week I am 
in Cape Town, and I live in a government house in Pretoria.  
I then arranged with my son to come and open the house 
for them so that they can finish the work.   
 
And then, of course, I phoned Gavin Watson to 
say:  You have started doing the work, you have not 
provided me with a quote.  How much is this work going to 
cost?  I want to know that.  And he said to me:  No, that 
10 
should not worry you.  When we meet I will explain 
everything.   
 
And when he said that I was very, you know, 
anxious because I could see that they were doing other 
things that I did not even understand what they were and I 
had not asked for it.  And I was, you know, keen to meet 
with him as soon, you know, like, instant.   
 
And when I came back at the end of the week, 
again from Cape Town, we met and he said to me that:  No, 
the reason why I said do not be anxious, it is because I will 
20 
not charge you for that work.  It is to me not much.  I run a 
very big company.  The cost of what I have done is very 
insignificant.   
 
I was, you know, not just surprised, I was 
shocked because I thought that he would appreciate that 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 269 of 331 
 
he could not offer me the pre-savings(?) for the simple 
reason that he was doing as a company business with a 
department.  And I explained that to him that:  No, I admire 
your, you know, generosity but I cannot accept a favour 
from your company because it is providing services to the 
Department Of Correctional Services.   
 
But not only that.  The other point also is that I 
did not except that kind of proposal to come from him 
because I had heard before about BOSASA even though I 
did not know exactly what the issues were but there was a 
10 
lot of reportage in the media and even there have been six 
years before the time that we are talking about at the time 
I was in the province, in Mpumalanga as Premier.   
 
So I did not really pay much attention and even 
understand what the issues are.  So I knew that there was 
something that, you know, is history which BOSASA would 
not want to find themselves involved and so.   
 
When the offer, a pre-service, in the manner in 
which this whole thing had happened, I really got very 
worried and I did not expect that from him.  But he insisted 
20 
that, no, I am not going – I will not argue for this.  You are 
my comrade and which cost too.   
 
And it left me very frustrated because what I can 
say is that those who have had the, you know, the 
opportunity with interacting with Gavin Watson, he was a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 270 of 331 
 
very strong character.  It was just so frustrating for me to 
say, you know, yes but no.   
 
So it went on and on, continuously, trying to put 
pressure on him to say bill, bill me and he was saying:  No, 
I am not going to bill you.   
 
I realised that I am caught in a very, you know, 
unfortunate situation that here is a comrade who is saying 
I have been doing this as a favour to you and I am 
rejecting it and he does not want to understand that but the 
material conflict of interest, prima facie case existed 
10 
directly and immediate.   
 
So I then decided that I will take the matter up 
with the President and I was comfortable in doing that 
because in our conversation he gave me an impression, a 
good impression that he also had access to the President 
and that did surprise me that he had access to the 
President and that he can see the President from time to 
time.   
 
And I felt that if I inform the President that 
Comrade Gavin has provided this service to me but he is 
20 
refusing that I must pay but his department, company is 
doing business with my department and he seem not be 
appreciating that this to the public is going to lead to an 
action of conflict of interest.   
 
And I knew that the President would find it easy 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 271 of 331 
 
to take it up with him to say:  Comrade Gavin, yes, we 
understand your generosity but you cannot do it.  I had no 
doubt that the President will be able to do so and I had no 
doubt that to raise by the President with him he could 
actually back-off and understand.   
 
The meeting with the President did not take 
place for the longest time.  I went to the President’s office, 
I spoke to the PA to the President at the Thuli House 
several times but I could not get ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That was President Zuma? 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   That was President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was still 2015? 
MR MAKWETLA:   This was in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you were trying to have a meeting 
with ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:   This was in 2015. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And of course - and this is apparent, 
you will see in my statement to the Ethics Committee that 
that pursuance of an audience of the meeting with the 
President got compromised by a stance that I had taken. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 272 of 331 
 
 
I had gotten involved in initiating it within the 
organisation and specifically within the community of 
military battles to say that the positions that were taken by 
the leadership of the military veterans, former military 
veterans of MK, MKMVA.  Those positions were very 
problematic and were very controversial.   
 
And we made several interventions and when we 
were not being listened to, that is when we came up with 
an initiative to establish the structure of the... now know as 
MK National Council that sought to, you know, challenge 
10 
the positions that were taken by MK.   
 
And that, of course, when it happened, it made 
the meeting that I was hoping that I would be granted by 
the President’s office to meet, you know, very difficult.  But 
to cut the story short, I mean, short.   
 
When in 2017, December the President left the 
Presidency and President Ramaphosa came in, I made 
immediately in January that request for a meeting with the 
President to brief him about the matter.  The President’s 
office kept on saying the meeting will take place, which 
20 
took a whole year until I met the President in December.  
By the time I met with the President in December and I 
briefed him about the matter a lot of things had happened, 
the matter had come out in the papers about BOSASA 
having put security infrastructure in my place and when it 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 273 of 331 
 
was 
published 
in 
the 
newspapers 
immediately 
Gavin 
phoned and apologised for what he had done only to say 
comrade, you were right, I am sorry.  You were correct, I was 
wrong and I am very sorry for this, I will send you the 
quotation what I was confirmed about when that happened was 
that it was too late, the damage was done and I told him so 
that his apology was not of any use and if he feels he wants to 
make an apology, he further direct that apology to the ethics 
committee of parliament and that is why in the attachments you 
will see a draft letter that he sent to me to say this is the letter 
10 
I would sent to the ethics committee explaining myself and 
apologising to the ethics committee and in the letter he 
actually says that he proposes that I should pay the bill 01.47 
but I should pay that money to charity organisation of my 
choice and I refused to do so because my rationale was that it 
was no point – it was not serving any purpose at that point to 
say, you know, pay but, you know, pay to a good cause of their 
choice if – and I said to him if he had raised this proposal right 
at the beginning when I asked for this, said – to say that I will 
not charge you, the money will go into – I would have 
20 
expressed an opinion about that and advise whether we should 
go that route or not and as a result of that, I refused to take 
his advice and insisted that he must send me the bill, he sent 
me the bill and the bill came as – either about 90 000, that is 
including VAT, it was 85 000 and about 90 000 including VAT. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 274 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that 90, or 19? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   90 or 19? 
MR MAKWETLA:   90. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MAKWETLA:   90.  And when that bill came I queried, said 
to him look, I see you are saying 90 00 and the bill was not 
itemised, it was not – and it was just saying security 
installations 90 000 and of course it was very abnormal, you 
know, the voucher, I mean that the bill of 90 is to be presented 
10 
that way and I knew or let me say I had an idea of how much 
the work done that I have asked for was going to cost the 
electric fence that I wanted and the repair to be alarm system 
in the house because I had an alarm system that got damaged 
when I made renovations to the house and all I had asked for 
was repair to the alarm system.  So I had a sense about how 
much that would be.  Why I had a good sense it is because the 
security of the house when I was appointed as a Deputy 
Minister the first time in 2009, of Defence and Military 
Veterans, the Department of Public Works as a matter of their 
20 
conventional practice came to my house and did a security 
evaluation and submitted a report of the security areas of the 
house that needed to be [indistinct] 04.28 and specified 
everything to say, you know, you must put burglar bars to this 
French door, I mean, burglar bars to this door and that door, to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 275 of 331 
 
these windows on this side of the house and that kind of thing, 
you need to have an electric fence, all of those things, came 
up to 33 000, according to the report that the Department of 
Public Works submitted to my office to say here is a security 
evaluation of the Deputy Minister’s house that Public Works 
get on – I mean, to sort them out.  So I knew that what I had 
asked for the security fence and the repairs to the alarm 
system could not have even reached 33 000 because 33 000 
included other things that were in that evaluation that was 
done by the security department and I did not implement all of 
10 
the elements that were there, so the 90 000, I said to Gavin, 
this is about things that I have not asked for, you put them, 
you installed them and I do not have that budget, I am only 
going to pay for what I had asked for and that is how we ended 
it.  I paid that money and they never queried it, they never 
came back to me, said that no, we do not agree, the 25 000 
that you are paying now.  So that is what happened, Deputy 
Chief Justice with respect to this [indistinct – dropping voice] 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So initially you sought a meeting with the 
20 
former President, when he was still President, you did not 
actually get that meeting you say because of developments 
involving the MK, Military Veterans, and the establishment of 
another structure and issues that were being dealt with, is that 
right?? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 276 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Although I must point out that when that 
happened, the political development that strained my relations 
with the President, it was after a long – months and months of 
asking for that meeting with the President’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And to give you a sense of, you know, the 
difficulty of securing and audience with the President and I 
would not know whether with the other colleagues it would 
10 
have been the same kind of, you know, difficulties.  I only met 
with the President twice in the nine years, almost ten years 
that has been in presidency and I think the Deputy Minister, I 
only met with him twice and not that there were no reasons 
that from time to time compelled me to seek an audience with 
the President and I would have benefitted from the audience 
with the President.  I only met him twice so that it was that 
kind of environment in which there is an effort to get a meeting 
with his office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when President Ramaphosa 
20 
became President you say you then sought an audience with 
him and you were able to get a meeting with him. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes I got a meeting with him in December 
2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  December 2018? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 277 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:   December 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By that time had you already made payment 
or not? 
MR MAKWETLA:   By that time I had already made payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So by that time it was a question of 
reporting to him what had happened. 
MR MAKWETLA:   I asked for the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And he needed to know about the whole 
story because it was also at the time now in the media. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   But when I asked for that meeting it was 
not something that was known. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   That is why when I met with him I said our 
meeting has actually now been overtaken by events from the 
President, the reason why I have been looking to have this 
privilege throughout the year it what is now in the paper.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you able to remember the month 
where you made your first approach to request a meeting with 
20 
President Ramaphosa in 2018? 
MR MAKWETLA:   January. 
CHAIRPERSON:   January? 
MR MAKWETLA:   January 2018.  He came into the office in 
December 2017. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 278 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:   In January. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And when we reopened the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   My request for that meeting was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And it was not only my request for this 
personal meeting it also included a request for a meeting with 
the MK National Council because we had, you know, our issues 
10 
with the Presidency before the National Conference in 2017 
and here we now had a President we thought would actually 
understand us better where we were coming from and what we 
needed to be assisted with which we thought, if it is done, 
would be able to assist the organisation.  So we wanted that 
meeting right at the beginning in January.  So he then said to 
the – advised the PA to say my meeting with him will take 
place on the back of the meeting with the MK National Council.  
It had always been like that to say we will meet with the MK 
National Council and we will meet, the two of us, that has 
20 
always been that – but it was from January, right from the 
beginning of January 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was even before Mr Agrizzi went 
public about some of these allegations against BOSASA 
involving various people. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 279 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:   Through that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, Chair, I did not realise that I was 
off mic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, I also did not realise otherwise I 
would …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Because you have [indistinct] 11.34, 
sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Makwetla, let us go back to your first 
meeting – not your first meeting but the initial meeting with Mr 
Gavin Watson after the festive season, was that January 2015? 
MR MAKWETLA:   That was January 2015. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  If I understand your evidence, was 
that …[intervenes] 
MR MAKWETLA:    Let me say, sorry, the breaking was in 
January 2015. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MAKWETLA:   But, you see, as I sit here, I would not be 
sure whether it was in fact January when I took this meeting 
with him. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   But it was right at the beginning of the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 280 of 331 
 
year. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   That is beginning of 2015? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Beginning of 2015, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, if I understand, he was complaining 
that the Department of Correctional Services was charging – 
was only allowing him a small amount for his services than 
what was the current market prices. 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, the complaint he had and wanted to 
bring to the attention of the minister was that he wanted to 
share the information that Correctional Services as far as 
10 
catering 
was 
concerned 
at 
the 
time, 
there 
were 
three 
companies that were having contracts, it was BOSASA and 
some other two companies. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   That were relatively very small competitive 
to BOSASA. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   And he had – he was saying that the 
owners of those companies had approached him to sell him 
their contracts, they wanted him to take over their contracts 
20 
because they were not opening the contracts, the business 
was not a going-concern for them and he was saying these two 
other companies were actually in terms of their rates paid way 
above what BOSASA was charging per mil, per [indistinct] 
13.50 and so he was saying that it is clear that the whole 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 281 of 331 
 
contractual arrangement that the department had with these 
companies was actually not sustainable but of course there 
was in the contractual agreement with the department an 
understanding – not an understanding, an agreement that the 
rates were to be adjusted on at the beginning of every year to 
take into account the CPIs on the [indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Ja, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not speak too far away from the mic 
Mr Makwetla. 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:   So he was bringing this as a crisis of 
catering that the department was sourcing from outside.  
There are correctional centres that were still and are still 
managed through internal labour as far as catering is 
concerned, their kitchens are concerned, they are not 
outsourced but the big ones, the big correctional centres, big 
five that populations of 5 000 to 10 000 are the ones that are 
outsourced to this company and it was a matter of concern 
20 
that the companies that were holding the contracts it 
appeared to me that they may have underpriced themselves 
when they bidded for these contracts in order to win the 
contracts but the prices were not sustainable and it was in 
that context that he had asked that. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 282 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So if I understand, he wanted the 
department to intervene either to increase the price they 
allowed those companies so that when he buys them he 
could be at a level where his company was, if I understand 
your evidence correctly?. 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, actually his request was that BOSASA 
must be paid at the same rate at least, must be paid at the 
same rate that the other two companies were paid. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But the gist of the request was he needed 
the company – sorry, the department to intervene. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He wanted – he had made his own 
submission.  As I am saying it was in their contract that at the 
beginning of every year they negotiate a new rate and it was in 
the course of those negotiations that they were not finding 
each other and he was saying that can the ministry, you know, 
intervene because there is a real, you know, crisis because 
from his side, hearing the bulk of these kitchens, BOSASA’s 
catering 
business 
was 
being 
subsidised 
by 
the 
other 
20 
operations of BOSASA, they were not making money.  So he 
was raising it to say we are aware that as much as the contract 
says this is the level at which we are to provide this service, 
all of us are thinking, all I am asking you to do is to consider 
at least with us BOSASA being paid at the same level as the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 283 of 331 
 
other two companies and that is what I took to the accounting 
office, the AG of the department. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now this person, he had come 
from an intervention did you not find it strange that he would 
then ask allow them – not ask, allow them to install services in 
your house when you were at that time the Deputy Minister of 
the department that did a contract with them? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Just say the question again? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I said did you not find it strange 
…[intervenes] 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   Having what, did not find it strange? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Myself? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  That there is a company that is 
rendering you services and this company had a contract with 
the department and it wished you to intervene on its behalf? 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, not at all.  All I was asking for was a 
service that I was going to be paid for and if they are also 
providing home security and they were going to do it at my 
place and I am paying for it, there was no conflict of interest 
20 
that I was anticipating at that point.  That is why I asked – he 
did not offer. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Asked for the services. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand.  But you must have realised 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 284 of 331 
 
that he wants you to intervene, so the price he is going to give 
you, it must be the price that is going to be favourable to you 
because he needs a favour from you? 
MR MAKWETLA:   No.  He wanted to intervene to assist me 
because I was at the time not getting a service provider 
available to do the job.  That is why he said I will assist you.  
The request to have the department take a second look at their 
contracts as companies that were providing, you know, 
catering, was raised before he actually even knew that I would 
be asking him if I get to know that they also do home security. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no, I understand. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now he raised the – he asked you to 
intervene, right?  And thereafter you then ask him about the 
security services.  Did it not occur to you that you were putting 
him under the spot because he has now got to give you a price 
that is favourable to you because he is also seeking a favour 
from you? 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, I did not have a concern but there 
could arise a possibility and as I said, Gavin was a CEO as a 
20 
company that I had best at the back of my mind that they had 
negative things said in the media about the work that they do 
there so I did not expect him to even – even if I had asked for 
a favour myself, I did not expect him to actually agree to that,  
favour – that request for a favour from his side just from the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 285 of 331 
 
caution that he would have wanted to exercise and as I am 
saying, it was something which also made me to raise in guard 
in dealing with BOSASA because I was also very clear that, 
you know, dealing with BOSASA everything has to be done by 
the book. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But, Mr Makwetla, just because – exactly 
because of that, why could you not ask Mr Watson to get you 
another company to do this for you because you knew there 
were problems with that, there were reports of problems about 
his company. 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   Well, let me repeat myself.  At the time I 
had looked around for the service and I could not have one 
and, you know, in the nature of the work we do, you do not get 
time to attend to your own personal or let me say private 
matters like on a daily or even on a weekly basis.  When you 
have time to attend to your own, you know, private family 
matters it is, you know, where you get that, you know 
[indistinct – dropping voice].  So this thing about getting a 
service provider and Gavin telling me that his company is 
also doing home security as I said earlier on was a big relief 
20 
for me because it minimised the burden that I had that I was 
still going to be, you know, on the same issue for longest. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you wanted – initially you wanted 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 286 of 331 
 
that they should provide with a quote first before they do the 
work. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Correct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But then some days, weeks thereafter, 
you came home, you find that they had started the work 
without giving you the quotation first that you asked for. 
MR MAKWETLA:   That is correct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Why did you not stop them then and say 
do not do any further work until I get the quotation, I know 
what I am in for? 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   As I said earlier on, I could not do much 
about what BOSASA had already done because the project 
was almost complete, as I said, barring things that had to 
be done inside the house.  That is a first reason for it.  It 
was like – it was, you know, a fait accompli. 
 
But secondly, I had a relationship of respect for – or 
between myself and Gavin or for him because of who he 
was for me and there would not have been for me an easy 
and reckless way of resolving any dispute between the two 
of us that would, you know, undermine our comradeship.  
20 
So it was just, you know, the right thing for me to do to 
seek a resolution of the, you know, the impasse that we 
had, in a manner which would still make him, you know, 
respect me as his comrade but also in a way that would not 
suggest anything that, you know, I am playing to the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 287 of 331 
 
gallery and wanting to make myself, you know, a better 
more 
disciplined 
person 
in 
terms 
of, 
you 
know, 
appearance, you know, to procedure.  So I could not stop – 
I could not stop them, that is why I sought a meeting 
immediately with him to say where is the invoice – I mean, 
not the invoice, where is the quote, where is the quotation 
for the work, how much is it going to cost me and, you 
know, to understand those other things that they were 
doing there because I did not ask for it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now tell me, by the end of 2015 work 
had been done at your place and you had not paid for it 
then, end of 2015. 
MR MAKWETLA:   At the end of 2015? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now we know that …[intervenes] 
MR MAKWETLA:   No, no, at the – yes, at the end of 2025. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no, take your time, think about it. 
20 
MR MAKWETLA:   Ja, ja.  No, no, you are right, at the 
2015, I think you are right, I was just… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, look, we know from the 
documents that you have supplied – that had been supplied 
to the Commission that in March – sorry, in August 2016 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 288 of 331 
 
you submitted a declaration of member ’s interest to 
parliament, am I correct? 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Turn to page 167 of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 167? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   167. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes, 167, I am there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This is now – I do not want to go 
through this, I am sure you know the document. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This is about your – this is the 
disclosure in parliament. 
MR MAKWETLA:   That is right. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you know the purpose of this, that 
you got to declare, and we will go through what you were 
supposed to declare. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Paragraph 1 is the issue of shares and 
paragraph 
2, 
the 
remuneration 
you 
will 
get 
outside 
parliament and then over the page on 168, it deals with 
20 
directorship.  Then 4, consultancies and [indistinct] 28.24, 
then 5, sponsorships and then 6, gifts and hospitality and 
then 7, benefits and air travel.  Then you go over the page, 
page 170, it deals with land and property and then 
pensions, public contracts, price.   
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 289 of 331 
 
 
Now I want us to go back to 169 about gifts and 
hospitality. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am sure you will agree with me that a 
gift amounts to something you did not pay for, am I right? 
MR MAKWETLA:   A gift is something you have not paid 
for, correct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now I know you have told the 
Commission that you wished to pay for the work that had 
been done at your premises, am I correct? 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:   Not that I wished, I wanted to pay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, my choice of English, you must 
excuse me, my English. 
MR MAKWETLA:   Okay.  Okay, we are saying the same 
thing yes.  Sorry. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ja, in times Bantu education catches 
up with me in the choice of words.  Here under paragraph 6 
why did you not just declare that there was work done at 
20 
your premises and by 2016 when you made this declaration 
you had not paid for this? 
MR MAKWETLA:   In my response, and I was not - and I 
will do much in this part of procurement through the act of 
performance. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 290 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MR MAKWETLA:  I have explained why I did not and I 
submitted that as an explanation that was sought from me 
by the commission. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MR MAKWETLA:  Which is that I did not accept the favour.  
I refused the favour.  During the period that you are talking 
about, as I said earlier on and I repeat myself, I have been 
going into the president office at Lethuli house seeking an 
audience with the president, anxiously in order to get this 
10 
bill to be paid because I knew it would be paid.  
 
Once the president raise it with Gavin I will pay this 
bill.  So that is the first point but the second point is that 
to declare what is unacceptable and what is wrong, let us 
not condone it, because it has been declared.  So this is a 
typical for me example of what should not be declared.  
 
Even if I had accepted, declared and okay, if it is 
declared this is what should not have been accepted by the 
ethics committee.  So declaration in that context for me, 
actually did not occur that I should declare it, because I 
20 
was in a battle to get a bill to be invoiced.  
 
That is one, but the second point why I did not and I 
have raised this matter, why I did not take this matter to 
parliament, it is because in the members of the executive 
are held accountable with respect to their conduct to two 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 291 of 331 
 
codes.  
 
There is the ethics code for members of parliament 
but there is an executive code again for members of the 
executive in relation to conflict of interest in the cause of 
the execution of their work as ministers, as [indistinct – 
00:02:30] ministers.   
 
That is declared to the secretary of cabinet.  It is 
declared to the president.  It is for that reason that when 
this matter arose, I did not take it to parliament.  I took it 
to the president because it arose within the province or the 
10 
realm of my duties as a deputy minister not as a member of 
parliament.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And the explanation you talk about is 
that what appears on page 172, the letter to the registrar 
of members’ interest.  Is that what you are talking about? 
MR MAKWETLA:  No, no.  This is a letter to me by the 
registrar.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  On 172? 
MR MAKWETLA:  On page, I am sorry I am on 171 sorry.  
On 172.   
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It seems as if ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It seems as if it is from you. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes, it is from me this letter, yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Is this the letter you are referring to? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 292 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:  Just give me a second.  Let me just get 
there.  Check out the letter.  No, it is not communicated in 
this letter.  It is not in this letter. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I thought this is the letter that you 
wanted to address, you are addressing to the ethics 
committee explaining ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  There are several I think letters that 
were addressed to the ethics committee.  It is not the only 
one.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Okay, no that is fine. 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But is it correct that in the end the 
ethics committee met and firstly let us go back.  This 
matter came before the ethics committee as a result of a 
complaint by ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  Mr Steenhuisen. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  By Mr Steenhuisen and then you 
responded and then on the 28 t h of March, ethics committee 
wrote and found you guilty of breach of certain provisions 
of the code.  
20 
MR MAKWETLA:  That is right. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And that letter is on page 179 to 180 of 
the bundle.   
MR MAKWETLA:  179 I am with you, ja.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  To 180. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 293 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  I see that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And I note here that the committee 
found that this item 4.13 of the code and where the code 
says, this is and I am reading from the letter: 
 
“A 
member 
must 
act 
in 
all 
occasions 
in 
according with the public trust based in them.” 
 
And it says: 
 
“The committee found that you breached the 
public trust that is based in you as a member 
of parliament when you allow the company 
10 
which is contracted to your department, to 
conduct work at your private residence which 
was not paid for.” 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes, I actually noted that ...[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Statement from the, not the first time, 
now as well when I appear before the commission, that I 
found it actually that statement to be [indistinct – 00:0-
6:49], because implied in that statement is that one is not 
expected to get services or buy goods to any company that 
20 
is doing business with your department.  
 
There are, you know there are many companies that 
are 
doing 
work 
with 
the 
Department 
of 
Correctional 
Services.  I only know a fraction or there could only be 
tenders over the companies that are doing work with the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 294 of 331 
 
Department of Correctional Services and I may have 
different time spot in your goods or whatever services they 
provide to the department.  
 
That too, it does not constitute a conflict of interest.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But is ...[intervenes] 
MR MAKWETLA:  What I mean is ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry. 
MR MAKWETLA:  What I mean is, sorry. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, no continue, sorry. 
MR MAKWETLA:  What I mean is the mere purchases of 
10 
goods of services from a company that is doing business 
with government would not in itself constitute a conflict of 
interest.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But is it not ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  But this is what the ethics committee is 
suggesting. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But is it not different where you know 
that the company is doing business with government?  I 
take it, I take your point where you do not know, but where 
you 
know 
the 
company 
is 
doing 
business 
with 
the 
20 
department in which you are a deputy minister, is there, 
should there not be a problem in that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  No, I do not believe so.  Of course I 
mean you may have a different take on it, but I do not 
believe so because I can buy goods from a company that is 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 295 of 331 
 
doing business with the department in which I am, and the 
transaction could be just like any other transaction. 
 
Let me just come with that position.  A small 
enterprise 
of 
you 
know, 
previously 
disadvantaged 
individuals that has been given a contract for purposes of 
affirming that company to provide whatever goods or 
services to the department.   
 
Even business myself, buying from that company 
myself, I will do it and do it consciously and deliberately 
because I know that this is a company, it is a young 
10 
company that the department is doing business with the 
department because the department wants to affirm that, 
you know, the owners of the company. 
 
As a public representative who is supportive of the 
empowerment 
of 
previously 
disadvantage, 
I 
would 
conscious and deliberately buy from them.  So my point is 
that by buying in itself, I am not agreeing with the ethics 
committee that that constitutes a conflict of interest.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let us take a case where for 
argument’s sake, let us say you are deputy minister in the 
20 
Department of Settlements, Human Settlements ... Human 
Settlements.  I think that is what it is called now.  Human 
Settlements where it is involved in the building of houses 
and so on and so on. 
 
You want to build a house, would you see nothing 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 296 of 331 
 
wrong in asking a company that is involved in building 
houses for the department to build a house for you? 
MR MAKWETLA:  I may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may? 
MR MAKWETLA:  I may.  I may Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, just elaborate.  
MR MAKWETLA:  I may because at times you know, 
exceptions are just as you know difficult to erase in 
people’s minds as things that are actually factual.  But it 
would, it would depend.  It would depend on you know, the 
10 
stage of what of that business, of that transaction.  
 
It would depend on you know, maybe a situational 
factor that may advertise, require that you know, you must 
just deliberately avoid creating perception. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, because how would you feel if people 
were seeing this company that they know has contracts 
with your department to build houses, also building a 
house for you?  Do you think it would be enough to say to 
those people what is the problem, I am going to pay them?   
 
They are building a house and I will pay them.  Do 
20 
you think that will be good enough for the people?   
MR MAKWETLA:  You are right and that I have considered 
to say it, hence [indistinct – 00:13:43] the volume of that 
transaction.  Building a house is you know for me a 
substantial you know transaction.  That is why I am saying 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 297 of 331 
 
that 
is 
a 
factor 
that 
you 
are 
going 
to 
take 
into 
consideration.  
 
So yes, there may be but respectfully I submit that 
you may buy from a company that is also doing business 
with 
your 
department 
and 
there 
would 
be 
nothing 
untruthful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it may well be as you have been 
giving 
evidence, 
I 
have 
been 
thinking 
about 
some 
scenarios.  It may not, it may well be that if there is a shop 
that provides some take away foods to your department, 
10 
you pass there and buy a can of Coke or something.  
 
You pay cash. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It is just they do not talk about food.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You buy a can of Coke and you pay cash 
and there you pass, maybe that might be a different 
situation but it may well be that once you talk about 
something that will require codes, maybe there might start 
to be problems because there may be temptation on their 
part to give you a favourable quotation compared to what 
they would give somebody else.  
20 
 
I am just saying there may be that situation but the 
way you just buy a can of Coke and pass, you do not need 
to negotiate with them, there is one price for every can of 
Coke.  Maybe that might be a different situation but where 
there might be negotiations involved or quotations, it may 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 298 of 331 
 
well be that it begins to be a different scenario, but I do 
not know what you want to say about that.  
MR MAKWETLA:  No, I agree with you Deputy Chief 
Justice.  I would agree with you that there is, indeed you 
know that logic is valid.  All I am saying is that it is ... you 
see, it is difficult to deal with this and this abusing 
ourselves from the knowledge of what happened.  
 
We have hindsight here and the expense to which 
we can be objective on the matter.  Maybe yes, we can but 
you know it challenges us because we know what has 
10 
happened.  The point that I want to make and it is there in 
the statement.  
 
I do not know which of my statements that I made, 
to say I wanted among other reasons to have a code 
because I was not sure necessarily that you are going to 
give me a favourable code.  Although I could not say that 
to Gavin without offending him as a comrade, but I wanted 
a quote because I was still going to compare when I have 
the time.  
 
It is not like I was going to say you know, yes you 
20 
have given me a quote, proceed, no.  I was still going to 
confirm.  I just happened to be that person who has this 
witness.  I do not part with money easy.  I do not part with 
money easily and even people in business, even the 
richest, those who are [indistinct – 00:18:20], you will still 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 299 of 331 
 
come across people who would still want to take advantage 
of every little opportunity to make an extra cent.  
 
So I was not sure in business what kind of a person 
Gavin was.  So I wanted a quote from him in order to 
protect myself in that respect as well.  So the point I am 
making is that you know, procuring from him was necessary 
in itself, a conflict of interest, now that we know yes, but I 
did not know at the time that there would arise a situation 
like this.  
 
I did not expect for the reasons I gave here.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Mr Makwetla, the committee also found 
that if there was a doubt you should have brought this to, 
at least to the registrar members’ interest, report it that 
you are doubting whether this conduct falls outside what 
should be reported or what should not be reported.  
 
The question is why did you not, if there was such 
doubt, bring it at least to the attention of the registrar?   
MR MAKWETLA:  Advocate, let me repeat one of the 
[indistinct – 00:19:54].  
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Please go closer to the mike again so I 
can hear you. 
MR MAKWETLA:  I was saying, maybe I should repeat one 
of the things I have said, the points I made earlier on. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 300 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MAKWETLA:  To say I did exactly that, and I did that 
to an authority which I was very clear that in relation to 
these matters, this matter there within its province, and 
that is the president, because I am responsible or I am 
held accountable by the executive code.  
 
I did not, that is why I did not even expect the 
ethics committee in parliament to make this an issue 
because as far as I was concerned, it fell within the realm 
of my duties as a deputy minister.   
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Mr Makwetla, just to round up 
some of this.  Is it correct that the, then after the ethics 
committee had found you guilty, the matter was escalated 
to what they call the joined committee on ethics, and it 
found you, it confirms the finding of the joined committee 
confirmed the finding of the ethics committee.  
 
Am I correct? 
MR MAKWETLA:  I have no knowledge of the development 
that you are talking about.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Look at page 181. 
20 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  181 is, it contains the announcements 
but it also importantly contains the reports of committees, 
and then on 182, the report of the joint committee on 
ethics and members interest on the complaints against you 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 301 of 331 
 
if I understand.  
 
You see that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So I do not want to waste much time, 
but on page 185 it deals with the, paragraph 5 deals with 
the findings and then paragraph 6 the penalty and then 
most importantly on 186, paragraph 6.4 it then the joined 
committee 
recommends 
to 
the 
house 
and 
then 
it 
recommends 
the 
following, 
and 
then 
being 
that 
the 
sanction that there must be a fine equal to 30 days salary 
10 
and then but you must apologise to the house.  
 
Do you see that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You confirm this was a finding of the 
joined committee? 
MR MAKWETLA:  I confirm what I can confirm to you is 
that I was not aware of this at all. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Because parliament had adjourned. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Okay. 
20 
MR MAKWETLA:  Parliament had adjourned and just the 
logic, there was such documentation generated after 
parliament 
had 
adjourned, 
is 
itself 
a 
matter 
for 
investigation because as you would see in the letter that I 
addressed to the ethics committee, expressing my deep 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 302 of 331 
 
reservation about how my case was dealt with, I referred to 
the violation, complete violation of procedure that were 
committed by the ethics committee itself.  
 
The ethics committee followed no rule that governs 
investigations and findings on matters that are brought 
before it.  The book, the rule book, ethics committee, has 
seven pages that details what the committee must do when 
it receives a complaint.  
 
None of those, not a single page of those seven 
pages was [indistinct – 00:24:23] by the ethics committee.  
10 
Now secondly, I think it is in this committee report 
somewhere, which I only saw now because I only saw now 
because in January this year ... [intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  This year? 
MR MAKWETLA:  This year.  This year in January, a few 
weeks ago I decided to get legal intervention to get my 
legal representative to file papers with parliament to 
produce documentation of the record of parliament around 
this thing.  
 
Then 
I 
thought 
that 
you 
know 
that 
is 
20 
correspondence that would have been shared with yourself, 
with the commission by my legal representatives.  If they 
have not done so it was just an omission. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, they did.   
MR MAKWETLA:  They have? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 303 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There are letters.  
MR MAKWETLA:  And to say that none of those letters 
were responded to.  None of those letters were responded 
to.  My point is that this, and we are talking about 
parliament.  It is not a statement that I make lightly, but to 
me raises a serious problem of possibilities of malicious, 
malicious contrary decisions taken by a committee of 
parliament because in one of the attached documents that 
you have there with you advocate, it says at the end there 
that this was to be, it is a report that was to be placed 
10 
before plenary. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
MR MAKWETLA:  Parliament had adjourned for the term.  
We were going to elections.  Parliament had adjourned for 
the term.  So when this was put as a report on which there 
was finality on the wrongdoing that member Makwetla had 
done, what was the logic? 
 
It was on the basis of that when actually the report 
had not served and was not going to serve before 
parliament.  Parliament has not rectified this report. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, look what you are ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  Sorry.  That is, yes.  That is for me a 
very 
important 
point, 
but 
secondly 
the 
committee 
announced, released a public statement on the day they 
finished the deliberation.  They released a public statement 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 304 of 331 
 
to say they have found member Makwetla guilty.   
 
Even as in the report themselves, they say this was 
to be put before the plenery of parliament and parliament 
was not the parliament that adjourned.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just explain this.  
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just explain this.  As you know I have 
not been a member of parliament so I do not understand 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  Mr Notshe, do you 
10 
think if we aim to finish at half past nine that might be fair? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It might be fair Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Makwetla? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair, it is just a few ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You are comfortable with that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  No, I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair, it is just a few issues.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You are raising an important issue 
20 
which we need to, when you say parliament had adjourned, 
you mean the parliament for that term had dissolved?  
Come to its end? 
MR MAKWETLA:  It has come to its end, not adjourned.  It 
had come to the end of its term. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 305 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  When did it come to an end in 2019?  
When did it come to ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  It came to an end on Thursday, the 28 t h.  
The very same date that is put here.  The very same date 
that is put here.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  28 t h of March? 
MR MAKWETLA:  28 t h of March.  On that very same day 
parliament was rising for the term. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well, I am looking here ...[intervenes]  
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  On page 179.  If you look at 179, this is 
the report of the ethics committee on 28 March 2019.  You 
see that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And the letter is to you. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  When you go over the page, two pages 
at 181. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It seems as if then the joint committee 
20 
sat on the same day as the committee and then made a 
finding that I referred you to.  Do you have an explanation 
for that? 
MR MAKWETLA:  No, I have no explanation. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  What is your comment? 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 306 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:  My comment is that there is something 
highly irregular in the manner in which, in the manner in 
which this matter was proceeded with and this actually 
confirms that because you see, this matter was a matter 
that was raised in 2018.   
 
It came right in the beginning of September.  When 
the ethics committee wrote to me in 2018 to say there’s 
this papers, can you provide us with an expenditure, and I 
give exactly that, 2018.  From there nothing happened until 
the following year, in 2019.  A week before Parliament 
10 
again, when I got a letter, the date would be around, I think 
on the 15 t h, that said within 48 hours give us in your 
explanation you provided, it was the year before, you had 
said that you made an effort to meet the President, can you 
adduce that.   You said that you paid BOSASA, can you 
show us proof of payment.  I provided those within – they 
gave me 48 hours on a matter that had been dealt with a 
year before and Parliament was again in the following 
week, I get this letter on Friday.  That time it was Tuesday 
I give them that letter, I mean the proof – sorry I give them 
20 
the proof of my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Proof of payment? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Payment and proof of attempts to meet 
with the President, I provided them with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 307 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETTA:   From there that was it, nothing said to 
say, we are not happy with what report – the evidence 
you’ve provided with for the following reasons, nothing 
said to me, nothing.  Instead, I got the letter that you going 
– a one and a half page letter that says, we have sat, and 
we have found you guilty.  Found me guilty without being 
allowed to appear before the committee, I was shocked, I 
was shocked. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:    Then just before we step off, is the 
President Parliament the sixth Parliament? 
10 
MR MAKWETTA:   It’s the sixth Parliament. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Has this – this is all, have they taken 
a resolution on this? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Nothing, I’ve never had – that’s why 
we’ve written to the speaker that’s why I took legal action 
and 
my 
attorneys 
have 
written 
to 
the 
people 
– 
to 
Parliament, they’ve written to the Speaker to say, can you 
provide us with a record on this matter, before we can, you 
know, declare any dispute, can you just provide us with the 
record, the minutes of this meeting, who were in this 
20 
meeting and all of that.  That has not been provided and 
that was in January, we are now in March, Deputy Chief 
Justice, we are now in March, this was raised with the 
Speaker ’s office it has not been responded to. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, just for the record, to put the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 308 of 331 
 
record properly, on page 153, because I just wanted to 
confirm this, page 153. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Thank you very much, I’m there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is this the letter, you say you wrote 
complaining? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Exactly, this is the letter that I wrote to 
them 
complaining 
about 
this 
decision 
that 
was 
communicated to say, I have been found guilty and as you 
can see, this is 2019.  This letter was written to the 
registrar of the Ethics Committee and this letter never 
10 
received any acknowledgement of receipt, there was never 
an acknowledgement of receipt and it was never like – and 
as you can see in was in 2019. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, on page 156, pages down the 
line there, to page 160. 
MR MAKWETTA:   156 to 160? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Yes. 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
 
Are 
these 
the 
letters 
you…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR MAKWETTA:  Yes, I referred to.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You referred about your attorneys. 
MR MAKWETTA:   That’s right. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, the one thing I want to raise with 
you is, did you get quotations to compare the quotations 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 309 of 331 
 
against the invoice you got from Gavin Watson? 
MR MAKWETTA:   No, the quotation of the work was 
R90 085 …[indistinct – audio distorted]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, no but I’m saying is, did you then, 
when you disputed this, on what basis do you dispute this, 
…[intervenes]. 
MR MAKWETTA:   I repeat myself – sorry I repeat myself, I 
based myself on the report that had the quote of the 
security work that must be done on my house which was 
done by Government. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But if I understand your evidence that 
was some years back. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Yes, that was…[intervenes]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Not in 2015/2016. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Yes, and yes you are correct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Why didn’t you get quotations for – 
and ask the industry for quotation for that year or 
subsequent years? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Well, I can say that the wisdom of doing 
so was not obvious to me that I should present BOSASA  
20 
with quotes which I argue that this is what I’m paying them 
from when it was not their quote. I thought that I was 
raising a matter which they may logic have an argument, 
but I felt that using a report with the quotes that were done 
by the Government security was for me, enough for me to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 310 of 331 
 
argue the case with BOSASA and I felt that to have 
somebody else quote as a basis on which I was paid would 
not, actually be, you know, necessarily a correct way of 
going about it. I felt that I would have this report of, you 
know, Government to fall back on as what I used to 
average what I expected to spend on that security fence in 
the …[indistinct - distorted]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   If you can just bear with me one 
second.  I’m going to just do first things, at the meeting, 
I’m going back, the meeting you had with Mr Watson in 
10 
early 2015 when he was complaining about – he was, 
immediately intervention of the department about the 
pricing 
were 
there 
any 
officials 
with 
you 
from 
the 
Department of Correctional Services? 
MR MAKWETTA:   No, it was just myself and Gavin, it was 
just the two of us there was no other PT…[Intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just repeat your answer and come 
closer to the mic. 
MR MAKWETTA:   In the meeting with the PT Chief Justice 
with Mr Watson, it was just the two of us, I didn’t take the 
20 
officials of the department, I took the department’s officials 
on my first visit to BOSASA which was in the December 
2014.  We had a whole delegation of officials then. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, I just also notice – we have 
noticed that when you paid the money, paid them the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 311 of 331 
 
money you paid in two tranches, what is the reason for 
that? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Because I could not afford to pay R25 
000 at once and I reasoned that R15 000, according to my 
estimate was an appropriate amount for the security fence 
and R10 000 for the repairs to my home that’s I worked out 
the figure of R25 000 but I could not pay at once, R25 000, 
I did not have it and that is why I made the point, I said, 
when BOSASA started doing work without my permission, 
without providing me with the quotation, it caused me a lot 
10 
of anxiety.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:    Now the person you are dealing with 
in BOSASA was Gavin le Roux – sorry, firstly Gavin Watson 
then how did you get to know Gavin Le Roux – sorry 
Richard le Roux? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Richard le Roux was the person in 
charge 
for 
the 
work 
done 
at 
my 
place 
and 
my 
understanding he was the team leader but not only that he 
appeared to be the technician who was there, more 
knowledgeable about everyone else because he was the 
20 
one who was telling me what is it that they put there and 
how does it work. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did you try to get the invoice from 
him? 
MR MAKWETTA:   No. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 312 of 331 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Why? 
MR MAKWETTA:   I had nothing to do with le Roux as far 
as the services that I asked for.  Le Roux was sent by his 
company with a team to come to work.  I asked for a 
service from the company, and I must pay the company. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chairperson, I have no further 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just a few questions Mr Makwetta.  I’ve 
heard evidence here, by a number of people, some of 
whom are members of Parliament or were members of 
10 
Parliament at some stage, including Mr Vincent Smith, 
whom 
you 
would 
know, 
that 
Mr 
Vincent 
Smith 
was 
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee of Correctional 
Services after the general elections 2009 and that that 
committee was given a report of the SIU which had 
investigated allegations of corruption involving BOSASA 
and 
the 
Department 
of 
Correctional 
Services. 
 
The 
documents that have been placed before the Commission 
in regard to how that committee dealt with that report, I 
think, includes minutes, prepared by, if I’m not mistaken, 
20 
it’s called Parliamentary Monitoring a certain NGO. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and Mr Vincent Smith confirmed what 
was written in those summaries or minutes that he was one 
of the people, if it’s not the whole committee, who were 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 313 of 331 
 
shocked at the kinds of findings that the SIU had made or 
allegations of corruption involving BOSASA at Correctional 
Services at that time.  They said, I think the word used 
was, shocking but they may have used another word but I 
think it would amount to shocking and the SIU, I think, had 
been conducting that investigation from around, I don’t 
know whether 2007/2006 but it had been conducting that 
investigation for a few years but it had completed by then 
and there’s the question of what that committee did to stop 
or address these issues at Correctional Services in the 
10 
relationship involving BOSASA and Correctional Services 
and it appears that there is not much that they give and I’m 
saying that because I think that’s what was put to Mr 
Vincent Smith and he said what he had to say.  Now, I 
would have thought that when you became Deputy Minister 
of Correctional Services, I assume that was 2014? 
MR MAKWETTA:   2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that these things would have come 
to your attention, that there were serious allegations of 
corruption 
involving 
BOSASA 
in 
its 
dealings 
with 
20 
Correctional Services and that you may even have been 
aware of the SIU report which Mr Vincent Smith accepted, 
it was shocking and of course in the public domain I think 
there were lots of allegations of corruption associated with 
BOSASA in its dealings with Correctional Services, maybe 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 314 of 331 
 
with other Government Departments as well but certainly 
with Correctional Services.  So, I would have expected that 
with that knowledge, whatever the position is, you would 
never have wanted to have any business dealings involving 
you 
personally, 
with 
BOSASA 
because 
of 
their 
own 
reputation, the fact that you are Deputy Minister for 
Correctional 
Services, 
what 
do 
you 
say 
about 
that 
expectation that I would have had?  In other words, I would 
have thought that you would avoid, just in case, you might 
be mired with allegations of corruption and conflict of 
10 
interest to say, I better have no dealings with them, what 
do you say about that expectation on my part? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Deputy Chief Justice what you are 
raising, it’s a very pertinent question.  The SIU report 
didn’t just say the – from what I – if I heard you correctly, 
you’re saying that Mr Vincent Smith was the Chair of the 
committee from 2009 to 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To 2014, I think ja. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Okay that it’s likely to have been the 
case, I do not know because I was not…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   He might not have been Chairperson 
throughout the term, I may be mistaken but certainly for 
some years, starting from 2009 after the general elections 
he was Chairperson of that committee and when that SIU 
report was discussed in that committee, he was Chair of 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 315 of 331 
 
that committee. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Let me just, quickly go to the last point 
and then I’ll come back to it.  It was to me, a mystery that 
when we were appointed to the Ministry of Justice and 
Correctional Services, was as it is mentioned, a hand over 
report in the Ministry that gives whoever comes in an idea 
of what the issues and the challenges of the Department 
were. Nowhere was the SIU report mentioned there and 
throughout 
my 
term 
in 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Justice 
and 
Correctional Service I was totally – and I must confess, 
10 
you know, that ignorance is not, you know, an excuse for 
not – I was not aware that there was an SIU report on 
BOSASA that was …[indistinct – dropping voice].  The 
report of the SIU we got it in 2019 a month if not two 
months before we left, before I left that Ministry as we 
were going to the elections and I even remember the venue 
where that meeting took place, extraordinary meeting took 
place where extreme big volumes of the SIU were being 
tabled, March/April and, if you want – March/April 2019 as 
we were winding up work going to the elections of 2019.  It 
20 
was never mentioned anywhere that there was a SIU report 
on BOSASA that carried the kind of challenges and 
problems that are talked about here and I asked myself, 
okay, the Deputy Minister ’s Office is not, you know, the 
place that will always be citied about everything in a 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 316 of 331 
 
Ministry. I wonder whether the Minister of Justice and 
Correctional Services who I served with there, Advocate 
Masutha was ever favoured with this report, was he aware 
of the SIU report for the whole five years that we spent 
there because as I am saying, the report only got tabled in 
2019, two months before we were leaving the office and 
what made that to happen was the work of this Commission 
and because in the disclosures that were made by Agrizzi 
there was then mention of these things that happened.  
You’ll appreciate that these are things that happened quite 
10 
a while ago, about six years before we were in that 
department and as I said earlier on, I was not in National 
Government I was in the Province. So, one had no sense 
of, you know, that kind of massive problem that was 
contained in those people and I must confess that they are 
sitting, those - that SIU report, in three volumes in my 
study.  I only browsed through them I’ve not had time to 
read them because as I’m saying it was at the end of our 
term of office there and I got appointed into the new 
department after the elections, I had now to quickly 
20 
familiarise myself with a lot of information of the new 
Ministry, the Department of Defence, so I did not have time 
to read those – that SIU report, I just browsed through but 
that’s what happened.  In relation to Vincent Smith when I 
came …[intervenes]. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 317 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the fact that, in the public domain 
there was a lot of allegations that BOSASA was involved in 
allegations 
of 
irregularities, 
tender 
irregularities, 
corruption with – at Correctional Services so I’m just 
reminding you that there’s that flag about the question as 
well. 
MR MAKWETTA:   Ja but I know…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you can continue with what you 
wanted to say which relates to Mr Smith then you can deal 
with the other. 
10 
MR MAKWETTA:   I was just saying that, in relation to Mr 
Smith, what I know is that he was one of the members of – 
and the committee on Public Accounts COPA who I found 
very useful and knowledgeable about the wrong – the 
wrong things that were happening in the department 
because as I was grappling with the challenges of the 
department on 2014 when I got there, I found that each 
time we went to SCOPA there were a lot of things that I 
was getting educated about and that thing unsettled me 
because, you know, in your duties, if it’s time you go to 
20 
Parliament their oversight committee members who are 
more knowledgeable about what is happening in your 
department than yourself, it’s not a good thing. So, I 
always made it a point that I listened very carefully to what 
Vincent and Mnyamezeli Booi who were members of that 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 318 of 331 
 
SCOPA committee who were very useful in the dealing,  
very aggressively with the challenges that were there in 
the department and it could be because in the previous 
term he was in the responsibility that the Deputy Chief 
Justice…[indistinct – dropped voice]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well one of the things that emerged 
when Mr Smith gave evidence last time was that at the end 
of the term, the five year term in Parliament, committees 
prepare what, I was told are called legacy reports, which I 
was told, is simply a document that – where the committee 
10 
or it’s Chairperson records issues that they want to bring 
to the attention of the incoming committee that will come 
after the elections, to say, here are issues that need to be 
followed up as far as we are concerned so that they can 
take it from there.  Then it’s up to the new committee 
whether it takes them up or doesn’t take them up, but they 
would be informed.  So, one of the things that emerged is 
that in the legacy report that he prepared he said nothing 
about this SIU report or the allegations or findings that had 
been made by the SIU in relation to allegations of 
20 
corruption 
and 
irregularities 
involving 
BOSASA 
and 
Correctional Services. So I just mention that for the sake 
of completeness but of course, one of the things I raised 
with you is, apart from the SIU report, in the public 
domain, you know, the understanding is that, over the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 319 of 331 
 
years there had been a lot of allegations in the media 
associating BOSASA with allegations of corruption in 
tenders, in general, but particularly Correctional Services 
and one would have expected that you would be aware at 
least that this is a company that just got all kinds of 
allegations against it.  Well, I don’t know, maybe you will 
say, I don’t know if the allegations are true or not but that 
might – that knowledge might have enabled you to say I 
won’t have anything to do with them in terms of my own 
personal things but will because then all deal with the 
10 
department in the ...[indistinct] Minister.  So, to avoid all 
possible allegations I would rather go and look for another 
entity, what would you say to that? 
MR MAKWETTA:   Deputy Chief Justice, as I said earlier 
on, I have a recollection of reports in the media and I am 
even very sure of which paper I saw those reports, it was 
the Mail & Guardian way back then and as I’m saying, this 
would probably have been just around 2008/2009. I was 
not in the National space, National Government I was the 
Senior of Mpumalanga at the time and there was enough, 
20 
you know, occupying and challenging me in the office in 
which I was.  I took note of those reports in the papers that 
here is a massive thing. I did not, even technically 
understand exactly what were they saying was the problem 
with this BOSASA.  That’s why I said, when I came to the 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 320 of 331 
 
Ministry this recollection was there, but I was surprised 
that no one was talking about it, no one, no one, actually 
in the department I observed that people will only mention 
BOSASA outside the meeting, you know, in hushed voices 
in the corridor and some, to the extent would – suggesting 
that ...[indistinct – word cut off] should not get jobs from 
the department.  I did not know where they were coming from 
okay.  All I know is that the was reports that were negative at 
some point and that is where it ends. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The talk that you had in – within 
10 
Correctional Services that BOSASA should not get jobs 
which you say people were saying outside of meetings would 
that have been prior to this already – prior to your 
transaction with BOSASA or – in other words you hear those 
things or… 
MR MAKWETLA:  When I got there in 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Now of course the first time of interacting 
when I interacted with BOSASA was at the end of 2014.  I 
would not be sure whether this you know talk in the corridors 
20 
would have been before or it had been after our visits.  But I 
was clear that with everything that I heard into my – that I 
knew about the need for me to go to BOSASA was actually 
even.  Though I was initially reluctant but I felt that no, 
actually I was strategically wrong.  I must go there and see 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 321 of 331 
 
for myself what is this and you know what is it that people 
think to be tend you know – people seem to be negative. 
 
And when I went there with the delegation from the 
facilities branch of the department who had proposed this we 
spent almost you know the whole day there.  Went there in 
the morning we left at just early afternoon because we were 
shown almost every 
element 
of the 
operation of the 
company.   
 
And I could not but ask myself the question at the 
end of the – that – as such – to say but I even asked Gavin 
10 
he question.  Gavin where does this negativity about 
BOSASA arise from because from what I have seen here I 
would not be surprised if there are very few companies in 
South Africa’s corporate that had that kind of excellence in 
relation to empowerment of their workforce that their 
workforce was permanently previously disadvantaged young 
people. That they only did not end it there.  They had a 
corporate university.  They were providing training of the 
Department of Correctional Services feature and you know 
financial management in Human Resources and 00:03:30.  
20 
Their technology division young black youth that were 
involved and of course at the level of equity he says in this 
company I am the only white.  So I was keen to ask the 
question, why is it that this company being the best 
corporate citizen I have at least ever been exposed to 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 322 of 331 
 
generating this negativity? 
 
Of 
course 
his 
answer 
was 
something 
which 
I 
anticipated was that no these are legacy issues it is the 
hostility towards the legacy issues of hostility towards the 
family in South Africa’s white corporate and which I knew 
that there may be you know hangovers of that problem and 
the other thing of course was that it was just business 
00:04:34.  It did not for me suffice.  It was not enough.  And I 
even proffered my opinion to him to say maybe there are 
other issues but what I suspect is that you are paying as a 
10 
company sufficient attention to publicity and marketing of the 
positive best practice that you have here because all of the 
things that I have seen I was seeing that I was hearing them 
and seeing them for the first time.  I would never have 
associated in BOSASA that they had a corporate university 
that was doing all of these things for black kids.  I would not 
have associated – BOSASA knew that it was the function 
that (inaudible) Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That visit when was it? 
MR MAKWETLA:  It was in December 2014. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  2014.   
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what do you say to – what would you 
say to a proposition that by the time you made this 
arrangement with Gavin Watson there was enough to have 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 323 of 331 
 
served as red flags for you to say do not – do not get 
BOSASA to do the job for you because one you had – you 
had – you were aware of media allegations of corruption, 
irregularities.  One when you became Deputy Minister.  You 
heard people within Correctional Services speaking in 
hushed tones saying BOSASA should not get jobs or 
whatever and then you know you – you – you – ja basically 
you were aware of these negativities.  What would you say to 
the proposition that there was enough to serve as a red flag 
to say I should not have anything to do with – should not 
10 
have anything to do with – should not have any business 
personally because some Deputy Minister of Correctional 
Services and they had business, they have contracts with 
Correctional Services and yet there all these allegations.  
What would you say to that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ye. 
MR MAKWETLA:  No Chief Justice the allegations were 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MAKWETLA:  To me they – at the back of my mind 
20 
registers – registers as negative. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Things that are alleged against these 
companies.  What exactly the issues are I – just did not 
00:17:18 to.  Just did not happen.  And that is why even as I 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 324 of 331 
 
got into that – we got into that ministry I think it should have 
been in May if I am not mistaken but it was in the first half of 
the year.  I only went to BOSASA leading this delegation in 
December the last week in that – I think we were closing it 
was the last assignment.  And the reason for it is because of 
two things actually.  During the course of the year of that 
2014 as part of my familiarisation forum I visited the – the 
regions which is what they are called in the Department of 
Correctional Services – of the Department first to see what 
the 00:08:10 was and just what kind of organisation this 
10 
department was.  And I discovered that in Correctional 
Centres where there was good practice and this is in relation 
to catering the kitchens, the food that was served to the 
offenders 
and 
the 
security 
infrastructure 
systems 
the 
electronic controls that were – that was work that was done 
by BOSASA.  I remember I recall very well that actually at 
Pollsmoor what struck me is that Pollsmoor was the only 
correctional centre which had a whole warehousing of farm 
produce 
that 
had 
warehouses 
at 
– 
cold 
you 
know 
warehouses 
and 
they 
had 
machines 
of 
cutting 
these 
20 
vegetables as they are coming from the farm.  It is the only 
correctional centre and I was impressed that they had such 
infrastructure and when I asked why is – why is it that the 
other correctional centres do not have this they said no this 
was not procured by us this is a donation from BOSASA.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 325 of 331 
 
This is what we need.  This is really where the department 
should be going because they are encouraging the utilisation 
of – of in the labour in order to sustain – to support the food 
supply to this correctional centre.  But as you would know 
correctional centres they would produce more than what they 
need and what is left and has to be you know shared with the 
nearby places.  But the condition of that produce whether it 
is meat and what have you by the time it reaches other 
correctional centres it is no longer of good quality.   So this 
warehousing 
was 
an 
important 
infrastructure 
and 
the 
10 
departments finances were under – that is another challenge 
the department had but they did not have the requisite 
budget to do the things that they were doing at least from 
the books but I was clear that they needed this infrastructure 
– this warehouse where cold storage and the BOSASA was 
providing this 00:10:55 and I said but if this BOSASA is 
doing things like this I wonder what is this all about.  Not 
only the Deputy Chief Justice there are other correctional 
centres where I went to and in the interactions just with the 
offenders at those centres is to hear whether they are happy 
20 
with what the – what it – how they are looked after some of 
them would say (African language) BOSASA.  They wanted 
BOSASA to be in charge of their kitchens because you know 
the practices that these offenders they are moved around 
especially I am talk – I am talking about those who are 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 326 of 331 
 
having long sentences they do not serve a sentence just in 
one place.  By the time a person finishes ten years he has 
been – he has stayed in about three or four.  So they would 
say (African language) BOSASA because they would have 
been … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:  In the centres where BOSASA is in 
charge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:  So the department was also under that 
10 
pressure in terms of that.  And so I said I need to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You wanted to go and see. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Understand this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:  But the facilities division itself said Deputy 
Minister you have been here for now a day the day is ending 
you do not know the industry that is supporting the work that 
we do.  We will organise a program where we will take you to 
all the companies that is how it happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Just one last 
20 
question.  Sitting there in 2021 looking back to the 
arrangement with BOSASA in 2015. 
MR MAKWETLA:  2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are sitting in 2021. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 327 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Looking back at what happened in 2015.  
What would you say?  Would you say you think it was – you 
think there was nothing wrong with it – it was fine or you say 
look maybe at that time I did not see it that way but with 
what I know now I would do things differently. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Put in the same position I was in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  I would done things very differently. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Very differently. 
MR MAKWETLA:  No the same. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the same okay. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Put in the same… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Position I was in then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With what you know – you knew then. 
MR MAKWETLA:  What I knew then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MAKWETLA:  And what I was looking forward to achieve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  When I led that delegation of officials to 
20 
Krugersdorp 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:  I would have done the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh maybe we are talking at cross 
purposes.  
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 328 of 331 
 
MR MAKWETLA:  Yes so… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am talking about the transaction in – 
about the security. 
MR MAKWETLA:  Oh the transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your house.  Yes that is what I am 
talking about. 
MR MAKWETLA:  It is something which Deputy Chief Justice 
I find most regrettable and I have said it – verbalised this in 
different places in the documentation possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MAKWETLA:  And statements that I have seen.  You see 
I never even suspected that Gavin would do what he did.  I 
never suspected it.  It really took me by complete – you 
know surprise.  And I must say that it is a lesson.  It is a 
lesson that you know you never know what you are dealing 
with and I am saying this because now there are the 
disclosures that we now know that were shared with this – 
with this commission.  For me some of those allegations are 
just I cannot – I try to understand the things – the 
sophistication that was here to the commission I do not want 
20 
even to lie to say that I understand what or how the system 
that are put in place into – that alleged you know tax 
implication – there is the (inaudible) you know.  Out – if I 
knew that sitting now here with what I know I would definitely 
not have come anywhere near – anywhere near 00:16:05. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 329 of 331 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I have taken longer than I 
thought I would but I think – let me check we – we are – 
after – it is after ten.  If Mr Makwetla’s counsel wish to re-
examine we might have to arrange for another time but I 
hope he does not – he does not wish to re-examine.   
MR MAKWETLA:    No as long as it… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:    Sorry Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MAKWETLA:    As long as it is not going to involve me 
10 
paying the gentleman across the floor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay.  No that is fair enough.  
Because if he – if he has to come back maybe you have to 
pay.  But let me hear. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Chairperson I do have fortunately 
questions that I want to put to Mr Makwetla in re-
examination.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say a question? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh just one? 
20 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  No questions Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh questions included ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Yes I want to – I want to cover 
certain topics that were canvassed with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were covered. 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 330 of 331 
 
UNKNOWN 
COUNSEL: 
 
I 
would 
– 
I 
would 
indulge 
Chairperson for as at least to be given at least thirty to forty 
five minutes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hey it is difficult – difficult now. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – I think we will need to – if it was 
like five minutes or even ten minutes I think it would be easy.  
I think because we are – we have gone past ten it would be 
difficult.  I think we would have to arrange for another time 
and if – and if Ms Makwetla would like to appear via Zoom or 
10 
you wish to appear via Zoom that can be arranged if that can 
help with cutting down on costs and so on.  So – so I think 
we will have to do it on another time and please do not judge 
Mr Makwetla too much.   
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  I will take that to note Chairperson 
when I send my quotation to – invoice.  We are indebted 
Chairperson for that indulgence.  We – even if it is via Zoom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  We will try to keep it very short and 
very straight to the point. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  But we just want to come  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is… 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  00:18:46 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  So an arrangement will be 
19 MARCH 2021 – DAY 364 
 
Page 331 of 331 
 
made for – for the re-examination to happen as soon as 
possible.   
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  :  And Chair if this re-examination 
for more than – less than an hour I think we can do it even 
piggyback on some other hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no it is easy we do not have to find 
a clear day.  We will find time – we will find time.  Okay.  Let 
me thank everybody for their cooperation.  Thank you Mr 
Makwetla, thank you to your legal team, thank you Mr Notshe 
and your team. Thank you to the technicians and to the staff 
10 
and everybody for having been able to – having been 
prepared for us to sit until this late.  Thank you very much.  
We will now adjourn.  Just for the benefit of the public next 
week the commission will hear evidence that relates to SARS 
on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday and on Friday it will 
hear the evidence relating to Denel and on Monday it is a 
public holiday but there is a possibility that the commission 
will sit on Monday morning.  If all parties which were 
involved in the day session are available but otherwise it will 
sit on Tuesday. 
20 
Thank you.  We adjourn. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 22 MARCH 2021 
