 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
04 MAY 2021 
 
 
DAY 388 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 260 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
04 MAY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 3 of 260 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 04 MAY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning, good morning Mr Seleka, 
good morning everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Koko 
MR KOKO:  Good morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay and Mr Koko is represented 
by the same legal team as before? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
Chair 
there 
is 
also 
a 
legal 
representative for Mr Jabu Mabuza. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  She may want to place herself on 
record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja please she must do that.  You can do 
that from where you if your mic is working.  Ja that one 
should be working. 
20 
ADV MATHABATHE:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV MATHABATHE:   My name is Leago Mathabathe and I 
am from Nortons Incorporated and I appear on behalf of Mr 
Jabu Mabuza. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 4 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MATHABATHE:   He did notify the Secretariat that our 
client does not at this stage intend to apply to cross-
examine Mr Koko however we just wish to place on record 
that his right in this regard is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry you are … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We cannot hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I cannot hear you well ja. 
ADV MATHABATHE:   Oh We just would like to place on 
record that our client’s rights in this regard are expressly 
10 
reserved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. 
ADV MATHABATHE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay please administer the 
oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR KOKO:  Matshela Moses Koko. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR KOKO:  No. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 5 of 260 
 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MR KOKO:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson I am going to do a recap 
but also explain what we need to cover in the evidence in 
regard to Mr Koko. 
 
By way of a recap we were in Eskom Bundle 14(c) 
10 
dealing with the emails exchanged between – or rather 
sent by Ms Mosilo Mothepu to Mr Koko and that was in 
regard to various issues regarding the MSA, the cash 
unlocking initiatives and certain aspects which became part 
of the Service Level Agreement. 
 
And the evidence of Mr Koko then what remains of 
it relates to the transactions which is the McKinsey/Trillian 
transactions on the one hand and on the other the Tegeta 
transactions. 
 
And just by way of explanation is that Mr Koko’s 
20 
evidence will be given against the backdrop of these facts 
which I will summarise now. 
 
On the McKinsey/Trillian you have the corporate 
plan for which there was a – the appointment of McKinsey 
to provide services in regard to the funding plan for the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 6 of 260 
 
corporate plan.  McKinsey was appointed and the services 
were rendered with Regiments.  The issue is the payment 
of the so called BEE partner of McKinsey after the 
corporate plan services related were rendered. 
 
Chairperson will recall a R30.6 million payment was 
made but not to Regiments to Trillian and that has been an 
aspect addressed with Mr Koko previously as well as Mr 
Anoj Singh. 
 
The other aspect regarding McKinsey and Trillian 
relates to the Service Level Agreement or as they call it 
10 
the Master Service Agreement. 
 
During the negotiations of the Master Service 
Agreement 
McKinsey 
subjected 
Trillian 
to 
a 
global 
assessment review the outcome of which was negative in 
regard to Trillian.  McKinsey then decided we will not 
continue our negotiations further to incorporate Trillian as 
our sub-contractor. 
 
That contract has other difficulties related to it 
because according to Dr Weiss he only received a copy to 
sign much later in September/October 2016 but by that 
20 
time he says in his affidavit and the evidence has been 
shown the contract had been terminated in – on 16 June 
2016. 
 
As a result of the termination a submission was 
made to the BTC of Eskom to settle with McKinsey and its 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 7 of 260 
 
BEE partner without the name being disclosed and we 
know from Dr Weiss’ affidavit and evidence that they never 
had – McKinsey never had a BEE partner in respect of the 
Service Level Agreement. 
 
But payments were made that amounted to R1 
nearly R1.6 billion combined to McKinsey and to Trillian in 
respect of the Master Services Agreement. 
 
So we would like Mr Koko before I move onto to 
Tegeta in summary to explain these transactions – to 
explain 
these 
payments 
because 
we 
know 
from 
the 
10 
evidence that he formed part of the Steering Committee 
that was specifically dealing with the services under the so 
called Master Services Agreement. 
 
That is on that score.  Then the Tegeta transactions 
which 
we 
will 
deal 
with 
start 
with 
the 
Cooperation 
Agreement and I go step by step once I have done this Mr 
Koko. 
 
Start with the Cooperation Agreement between 
Eskom and OCM which gets to be terminated in June 2015 
after the arrival of Mr Molefe.  Thereafter there are 
20 
meetings with Eskom officials Mr Koko also included with 
OCM regarding further supply of coal to Eskom but also the 
acquisition of OCM by Tegeta/Oakbay the Gupta owned 
companies. 
 
There is a meeting on the 24 t h which is important – 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 8 of 260 
 
24 November 2015 where Mr Koko is present and he 
impresses on OCM officials that you must sell the assets 
not only of OCM but you must sell the assets of OCH.  So 
the scope of the assets gets widened which was not the 
original offer made by Tegeta. 
 
With that Chair is Mr Koko’s letter to the DMR which 
necessitate 
– 
which 
brings 
about 
the 
submission 
of 
December 2015 for the R1.68 billion pre-payment decision 
which gets to be converted into a guarantee. 
 
We will show that there are emails between Mr Koko 
10 
and Ms – one official at the DMR Mr Joel Rapela before the 
letter to the DMR is made before the submission is 
submitted to the board and it is a discussion that leads up 
to these documents. 
 
With that is the question of why that submission 
was made – the reasons for that submission.  Why did the 
board had to decide this matter on such an urgent basis 
and Mr Koko will be given a chance to explain himself on 
that. 
 
There is a subsequent submission now it is in April 
20 
2016 this one is for an amount of R659 million payment to 
Tegeta.  It is a pre-payment.  There is no coal yet – they 
are making a pre-payment to Tegeta.  That too will require 
the explanation from Mr Koko. 
 
The treatment of Tegeta versus OCM/Glencore will 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 9 of 260 
 
come under the spotlight particularly in regard to the – the 
penalties claim of R2.17 billion which they sought to 
enforce against OCM but change it substantially when it 
came to Tegeta.  And on top of that gave Tegeta temporary 
relieves in terms of which Eskom then comprised on the 
quality of coal and the quantity of coal – something we do 
not see when it comes to OCM particularly in respect of the 
Corporate – Cooperation Agreement. 
 
And from – from the transactions Chairperson the – 
the picture that emerges is that the money that was being 
10 
generated for the – for Tegeta’s benefit – for the Gupta’s 
benefit was meant to assist them in the acquisition of OCH 
ultimately. 
 
With that background in mind we are going to have 
to see whether we cannot cover all these issues today with 
Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright you may start.  Mr Koko 
you – your facial expressions suggest to me you are asking 
to say something? 
MR KOKO:  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Chair I – this is my sixth time today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And I must tell you that for the very first time I 
am feeling aggrieved because after the sixth occasions I 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 10 of 260 
 
have not told my story.  I have submitted an affidavit to the 
commission.  I was told on the first day that I must take it 
as read. By the way they look – things are going I do not 
even think that my counsel will be given an opportunity to 
re-examine me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She will be. 
MR KOKO:  I hope he will not be technically told that he 
does not have the time.  But Chair the – the – there are 
important issues that I (talking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would want to deal with. 
10 
MR KOKO:  I feel very strong about.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR KOKO:  And the summary of Mr Seleka … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does not cover you. 
MR KOKO:  Makes it more important Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Let me say this.  Mr Seleka’s story of Optimum 
starts with the Cooperation Agreement and that is because 
of the gossip that is being going around and you will find 
that gossip in Ms Thuli Madonsella’s report.  You will find 
20 
that gossip in the OUTA Report too.  You will find that 
gossip in the newspapers. 
 
The story of Optimum starts much earlier than that.  
It starts when the Deputy President or we start when Mr 
Ramaphosa was the President of – was the chairman of 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 11 of 260 
 
Optimum.   
 
I have requested from the legal team the hardship 
notice that was submitted by Glencore OCM on the 2rd of 
July 2013.  I got an email – I got a reply back that says we 
have requested it from Optimum and we will give it to you 
when we get it. 
 
I did not want to come here today without that 
hardship notice. That hardship notice is very important 
Chair because the story of Optimum is the one that says 
there was state capture Mr Molefe was brought to Eskom 
10 
and when Mr Molefe was brought to Eskom he cancelled 
the Cooperation Agreement – he imposed penalties on 
Optimum – he then drove Optimum into hardship.  
 
When the actual – when the actual hardship notice 
was in 2013 not in 2015 it is very important Chair that we 
read into what was in the hardship notice because I am 
really tired of the whole – of the gossip.  I am really tired 
Chair of people listening to the gossip and ignoring the 
documentary evidence that is there. 
 
And one of the things we are going to do today 
20 
Chair and you are going to be very angry with me – very 
frustrated with me but I am going to force you to work of 
the documents not out of the gossip. 
 
So I do need – and I will be very angry if Mr Seleka 
does not show the – the hardship notice that was submitted 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 12 of 260 
 
by Optimum/Glencore on the 13 t h of July 2013 that was 
followed by an arbitration agreement on the 12 t h of 
December 2013. 
 
Chairman the – the other thing I need to address 
you to is that it cannot be that witnesses come to you – to 
this commission to mislead you and get away with murder.  
 
I come here to assist you to get to the truth.  There 
are witnesses here Chair who come here with the intention 
of misleading you so that you do not get to the truth and I 
really want to take you to task and say there has to be a 
10 
recourse for witnesses who come here to mislead you 
deliberately so and I will – and it is very easy to show 
which witness has misled you deliberately. 
 
Let me give you an example.  Mr Clinton Ephron 
never submits in this commission statements under oath.  
We get pushed – we get harassed to present statement to 
this statement under oath and we do so because we 
understand why because we do so out of respect and we 
have committed that we will assist the commission. 
 
Mr Ephron does not do that and he lies deliberately 
20 
in his statements.  And Chairman I will build up to this 
topic because this behaviour of Optimum/Glencore it will 
come out when we discuss the – the details of Optimum. 
 
He comes here and says Mr Ramaphosa was never 
the chairman of Optimum.  When I listened to him saying 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 13 of 260 
 
that I knew he was lying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  The – who was the CEO of Optimum when 
Cyril Ramaphosa was the chairman of Optimum I think it 
was Mr Clinton Ephron.  He cannot forget his boss but he 
does so for a reason Chair and we will get into the details 
of why does – did he come to the commission to lie to you 
deliberately and later when he is shown to lie he submit 
another statement to the commission and say I made a 
mistake.  I was misled by other things. 
10 
 
It cannot be Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no.. 
MR KOKO:  These people who come to the commission to 
lie there has to be consequences.  Mr Clinton Ephron lied 
to protect his business associate Mr Ramaphosa is a 
business associate of Glencore and he is being protected 
by Glencore.  I will get into the details.  It cannot be Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no Mr Koko I understand.  Let me say 
starting with Mr Ephron I did previously say he needed to 
be approached by the legal team of the commission with 
20 
regard to the issue of – I think it was in regard to an issue 
that was raised by Mr Brian Molefe namely he was saying 
in effect if I recall correctly that Glencore was trying to 
extort money from Eskom by the demands that they were 
making in terms of the coal price. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 14 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  And I will show why he is saying that because 
he is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and – and he referred to the fact that 
I think when Mr Ephron was giving evidence or somebody 
else was giving evidence some time back I had raised the 
issue of why it was that Glencore had signed a coal 
agreement with no escalation in terms of why there is no 
provision and at a certain time they were now complaining 
that that vice that too oppressive and so on so I could not 
understand that.   
10 
I had raised that so Mr Molefe went back to that and 
said Chairman this is what you raised when so and so was 
giving evidence and it was appropriate and then he 
elaborated following upon his evidence I asked the legal 
team to obtain an affidavit from Mr Ephron with regard to I 
think Mr Brian Molefe said they had not done due diligence 
if I am not mistaken so I said well Mr Ephron must be 
approached to obtain an affidavit to deal with this issue 
which I think was subsequently furnished but now when I 
say that I must be careful because it might not be an 
20 
affidavit it might be a statement so I might not have picked 
up what it was but it was furnished and then of course I 
think he was asked to comment on Mr Brian Molefe’s 
evidence about Mr Ramaphosa having been chairman at a 
certain time of OCM I think and I think he – he did file an 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 15 of 260 
 
affidavit – an affidavit or statement I am not sure. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a statement – it is a statement 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And subsequently another one saying it 
was a mistake or whatever.  So – so I just mention that and 
I think I have said to the legal team arrangements should 
be made for him to come and deal with these matters in – 
in the hearing and give evidence. 
 
So – so a gate has not been – but I think I have 
said that. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the team. So – so I thought let me 
clarify that in the first place.  Secondly you will be given a 
chance to – to deal with the issues that you want to deal 
with.   
 
It may be that at a certain stage the commission’s 
legal team is questioning you on certain matters and they 
might not cover everything that you wish to be covered.  
When you answer them just answer them in a manner that 
you believe is adequate to give your side of the story.   
20 
 
But when they are done or at a certain stage I will 
give you a chance to cover whatever else might not have 
been covered under the questioning which you think is 
important to place before me. 
 
So that chance will be given.  So you do not need to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 16 of 260 
 
be concerned about that. 
MR KOKO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if you want to expose any witnesses 
who have lied here do that it is important – okay. 
MR KOKO:  Chair thank you very much I really appreciate 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I – there is another issue that I need to 
cover. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:  When I was here the last time I made a plea I 
actually asked you in earnest because I – I – you know 
there is this pre-occupation of the balcony at Melrose Arch 
which assumes that Mr Masango has been to Melrose Arch 
only once and therefore it becomes important and I have – 
I am showing that – I have referred to a statement of this 
concern that in fact he wanted Ms Goodson was introduced 
to Mr Masango in his office almost seven months later 
when Mr Masango denied that he has been there twelve 
month – he has even been there again.   
20 
 
He has lied about the meetings on the side of the 
road.  He has lied about the meetings on July – on March 
11 but park that.  What is more important for me is that I 
asked you Chairman – I begged you that go to Ms Daniels’ 
computer and my proposition is based on the properties of 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 17 of 260 
 
the doc – of the four suspension letters that were made to 
this commission by Mr – Ms Klein and Mr Khoza that they 
were – they actually originated from Ms Daniels and 
modified by Mr Essa. 
 
I asked you that go to Mr – go to Ms Daniels’ 
computer it has been imaged and my proposition is that 
you will find them there and they – and that will link Ms 
Daniels to Mr Essa. 
 
I listened to the specialist affidavit and I was hurt 
when I heard him say he does not have Mr Daniels 
10 
computer or he does not have Ms Daniels images.  
 
When I asked and I also told you previously that 
when it is matters that affects Mr Koko your investigators 
and your legal team are very quick – are very quick to 
make a follow up but they have got blue eyed witnesses I 
still do not understand why that the computer of Ms 
Daniels or its images were not made available to the 
specialists. 
 
I think there is a deliberate – I have got a thesis 
why it was not done because they are protecting Ms 
20 
Daniels.  They do not want to disturb her evidence.  I can 
also see what they are doing.   
 
My images of my computer at Eskom should also be 
given to the computer experts.  They can – they must not 
chip their way.  I have played open cards with you.  I have 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 18 of 260 
 
told you I have never cont – interacted with Ms – Mr Essa 
on line. I have told you I have never had telephone 
conversation with Mr Essa.  Your commission has got all 
the telephone records.  This commission was set up Chair 
on the basis of the telephone conversation between Mr 
Molefe and Mr Ajay Gupta.  That is what Ms Madonsella 
used and all of a sudden Ms – even Mr Molefe was not 
really asked about that.   
 
I have a problem that my computer – the images of 
my computer and the images of Ms Daniels have not been 
10 
made available to the experts.  Because I will tell you what 
is going to happen.  When you get the results they are 
going to say but it is inconclusive because we did not have 
Mr Koko’s images. 
 
It is very clear having listened to the expert and I 
am much more convinced that those suspension letters 
originated from Ms Daniels and were modified on an Apple 
computer of Salim Essa.  It is very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Now the second thing Chair that I want to 
20 
bring to you; you also asked – I said to you Ms Daniels 
ought to know who she was talking to when she emailed me 
and copied Infoportal address.  She ought to know – to 
have known who she was blind copying that she did not 
want me to know.  You asked for those emails.  My gut feel 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 19 of 260 
 
tells me that you do not have them as yet and I – I do not 
understand why you do not have that with you as yet when 
then you asked your team to give them to you.  But I have 
brought them to you Chair. 
 
I have asked my team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I have got my legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Mr Barry if you can give Chair – because my 
suspicion tells me that your team I have made the 
10 
proposition that your team will not give it to you.  Again 
they are protecting Suzanne and they should have them to 
you because it is very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  The second part is the emails – is the 
conversation between – is the transcript of Dr Ngubane 
when he said he was talking to  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleke. 
MR KOKO:  Seleke when Seleke was not even in the 
employ of … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of Public Enterprises. 
MR KOKO:  Of Public Enterprises.  You asked for those 
transcripts again I suspect you do not have them.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not remember the transcripts 
relating to that but if they are available you know we can – 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 20 of 260 
 
I do not remember that part asking for that. 
MR KOKO:  I remember very well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I may have I do not know. 
MR KOKO:  I remember – You can go to the transcripts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have been listening to any witnesses for 
the past three years. 
MR KOKO:  Mr Seleka even said to you there is no point of 
going there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  He even said that.  But you ask for the emails 
10 
when Ms Daniels was talking to you and blind copied 
Infoportal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  Because they – they will come again Chair 
they will come again.  Then we go to Ms Mothepu Chair.  
We spent the whole day last week when I was here the 
whole day going through emails – seven emails and – and 
the fury of Mr Seleka is that he will go through the emails 
and he linked me to McKinsey and we will finish it off now.  
And 
then 
yesterday 
I 
got 
– 
yesterday 
– 
yesterday 
20 
afternoon, I get an affidavit from McKinsey, from the Legal 
Team dealing with those seven emails and I hope we will 
get to it, and all what McKinsey is telling you is that the 
negotiations of the MSA started in July 2015 to November 
2015 
and 
Mr 
Koko 
was 
never 
involved 
in 
those 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 21 of 260 
 
negotiations.   
 
That is the affidavit that comes from McKinsey 
yesterday and yet we sit here going through Ms Matshepo’s 
emails saying Mr Koko was a lead negotiator and here 
comes 
a 
lead 
negotiator 
from 
McKinsey 
saying: 
 
I 
negotiated this contract.  Mr Koko was never here.  
Chairman, these are the type of witnesses ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR KOKO:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you must cringe(?) the Legal Team 
10 
in regard to that affidavit from McKinsey because they 
would be the ones who obtained it and it kind of supports 
you. 
MR KOKO:   I accept that.  All that I am saying to you is 
that why would the witness come to you and present emails 
to you that I have never replied to and say Mr Koko was a 
lead negotiator when the lead negotiator on the other side 
said:  I negotiated this contract.  Mr Koko was never 
involved.   
 
These are the type of witnesses Chair that are 
20 
not helping you get to the – there are things Chairman that 
I know personally that I know exactly what happened, that I 
can easily assist you and – but you are not assisted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Because other witnesses are trying to take it 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 22 of 260 
 
elsewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  But it is important that you 
provide your assistance as well because if you do not then 
the story is one that you believe that it is not true.  So it is 
important that I get all sides.  But I want to talk about the 
issue of ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   But...but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...computers 
and 
the 
imaging 
of 
computers.  Mister...  Well, let me say this.  It may be that 
the – you will know that the investigators had obtained 
10 
some investigators opinion about those pre-suspension 
letters but I think after you had raised the issue of 
Ms Daniels and they need to check, I said to the Legal 
Team they need to obtain another opinion. 
 
So that we see whether it is still the same effect 
or different effect and that led to the specialist that you 
would have heard I was not happy that certain things had 
not been covered during the evidence of that specialist.   
 
As a result, you would have heard that the 
arrangement was that he needed to go back and deal with 
20 
certain matters and the arrangement is that he will come 
back.  Now...   
 
But I want to have this things, this issue dealt 
with and finalised and I am thinking that the way to do it, 
Mr Seleka, I wonder whether your junior or somebody or 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 23 of 260 
 
the investigators if they are here, if they can get hold of 
the specialist concerned. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And get hold of Ms Sharon van Rooyen.  
She is one of the senior – she is one of the – leadership of 
the investigation.  And if they could come here maybe at 
one o’clock or two o’clock.  What I would like to happen is 
that in your presence and in the presence – in your 
presence, Mr Koko and his legal team can articulate to the 
investigators exactly what he says in his view should be 
10 
looked into so that if there is a problem with doing it, it can 
be addressed, they can raise the challenges there and 
then. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hopefully, at the end of that discussion 
there will be clarity in terms of what is possible, what is 
not possible and that which is possible will be done in what 
time.  So that is what I would like to see happen. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that Mr Koko and his legal team are 
20 
there to convey to the investigators what he is conveying 
to say this and that and that and that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the – certainly there should be 
no perception that the Commission does not want to look 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 24 of 260 
 
into certain matters that should be looked into.  So that is 
what I am suggesting.  Mr Koko, would that be fine with 
you? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, that will be fine.  There is a 
document and my counsel call it a wish list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And that is a document that Ms Daniels says I 
got to her and it had my handwritten notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   I mean, again ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...it is as simple as that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   If it is my document, it will be found on my 
computer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   It is 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   It will be found on the computer.  Look for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Chair, the last thing I want to say is that we 
received the statement that was made to the Hawks by 
Ms Alana 
in 
2018. 
 
Now 
that 
I 
have 
interacted 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that from Travel Excellence? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 25 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Travel Excellence.  Now that I have interacted 
with it, I know understand that is not helpful for the Hawks 
but we have asked for the originals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   We still have not received them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   It was a very false affidavit that borders to 
perjury and misleading the end of justice and it is one of 
the weaknesses that I need you to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Ms Alana cannot come here and deliberately 
lie to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But to remedy that, the Commission – I think 
the investigators realised that it is a hot potato.  They are 
going to assist(?) Alana – affidavit from Ms Suliman, which 
is equally, in my view, to mislead you and has perjury in it 
and we will get to it and we will get to it when we get to 
those dealings(?).   
 
But Chairman, people cannot come here and 
20 
deliberately lie to you and get away with it.  I do not come 
here to lie to you.  But the Travel Excellence people like 
Mr Clinton ...[indistinct], like Ms Suzanne Daniels who lie.  
Cannot get – come here and lie and get away with the 
murder. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 26 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine.  You – it is important 
that if you believe that the evidence they give in their 
affidavits and whatever is not true, you give the evidence 
that would contradict them.  I wanted to say Mr Koko and I 
know that the last you were here I did say something about 
this.  I am keen to make sure that every concern you have 
raised.  We have been able to apply our minds to it.  If we 
think it has merits we address it.   
 
If we take a different view you are told we have 
looked at this.  We do not agree everyone of them as you – 
10 
as I said earlier on.  I do the same with other witnesses.  I 
have done the same with Mr Brian Molefe in regard to Ms 
Ephron.  I am doing the same with regard to Mr Montana 
who was here yesterday.   
 
So when people have got concerns, they are free 
to raise their concerns and I want us to – I want the Legal 
Team, I want the investigators to look at those properly 
and in the end I want to be satisfied that those concerns 
have been looked at.   
 
If they have merit, something must be done.  If 
20 
they – if they do not agree we know why they do not agree.  
So the last time I think we talked about the issues that had 
been covered in your attorney’s letters sometime back.  So 
if there are other concerns that you have previously 
articulated and you know that to your knowledge they have 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 27 of 260 
 
not been addressed, please feel free to raise them again 
as we go along.   
 
And the idea is that they need to be given 
attention, whether they will agree with you or not but they 
need to be given attention.  Where it looks like there 
should be further action, there should be further action.  If 
it does not appear that further action is justified that is fine 
but at least you must know what has happened to those 
concerns. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I feel I am being listened to.  So I 
10 
appreciate that.  Just on a light note.  There is News24.  It 
is running a series called Eskom Files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And it is putting names of people there which 
are the names of the people that I have listed.  And they 
are 
talking 
about 
R 178 billion 
reeked 
tender. 
 
Now 
Chairman, I have always said my blood is blue.  The 
problem of Eskom today is the R 450 billion debt that it 
accumulated through its build(?) programme.   
 
And many South Africans were looking at this 
20 
Commission and say it will say something about the real 
Eskom problem.  I mean, I am on record to say the only 
way you can sort Eskom problem is to get at least 
R 250 billion of its debt and put it into a sovereign debt.  
This Commission is going to finish its work without 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 28 of 260 
 
addressing the real Eskom problem.  I think the scholars in 
the future are going to get you and worry about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well, we must tell now the 
scholars, 
Mr 
Koko, 
that 
maybe 
it 
is 
because 
the 
Commission did not get there because maybe Mr Koko did 
not respond to my call in 2018 to say everyone who has 
got information that falls within the terms of reference, 
please come forward.  Okay alright.  [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   Understood, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs]   
10 
MR KOKO:   I have disrupted(?) you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I did not hear 
part of the Dr Ngubane – maybe I will get to it in due 
course Mr Koko.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it was simply this.  Mr Koko said 
Dr Ngubane, he – Mr Koko said:  I asked for a transcript of 
conversations between Dr Ngubane and Mr Seleka – 
20 
Seleke.  [laughs]  Seleke. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he was saying he suspects that I 
have not been given those.  So I just said ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 29 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...I do not have a recollection of that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you said Mr Koko, is that 
right? 
MR KOKO:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, Chair, I confirm that that 
request I also do not have any recollection of it but let us 
cut to the chase Mr Koko.  Mr Koko, in regard to the – let 
me start with the Corporate Plan but I am going to an 
10 
answer which you gave me, not to go into the details of it.   
 
Remember in regard to the Corporate Plan, I told 
you about the evidence of Ms Tsholofelo Molefe who said 
that in 2014 when she was doing the budget, she was 
being told that the minister said the budget is not robust 
enough and as a result Mr Collin Matjila offered to make 
her meet with what turned out to be Mr Salim Essa who 
offered to help them with the balance sheet optimisation 
and cash unlocking initiatives but instead of a doing a 
proposal they gave a draft agreement and she did not 
20 
agree with that.   
 
They did not get Mr Salim Essa, did not get what 
he wanted at the time and he had told Ms Molefe when he 
was asked about whether you have capacity, said that:  
Yes, we work with McKinsey from time to time.  You recall 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 30 of 260 
 
that? 
MR KOKO:   I do, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And your response was:  Well, 
McKinsey does not Regiments to get work at Eskom.   
MR KOKO:   That was my response, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But I think the point I was making 
to you was different.  It was that Regiments needed 
McKinsey to get work at Eskom and this is what was 
happening.  That Regiments was approaching Eskom and 
saying:  We have the capacity of McKinsey with us.  You 
10 
could give us the work and we will do the work.  So it is 
just the other way around. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, except that it does not make sense Chair.  
I have said – I have told you that McKinsey has been in 
Eskom, as far as I remember, since what we call Project 
AA2.  Project AA2 was led by Mr Gcabashe in 2005 to 
2007.  Chairman, I sound and look old when I talk about 
Eskom issues.  My association with Eskom is 33-years.   
 
Mr Thulani Gcabashe brought Eskom – brought 
McKinsey into Eskom in 2005, 2007 in Eskom and up until 
20 
2013, I do not remember McKinsey tendering for a job at 
Eskom.  For lack of a better word, McKinsey was a captive 
- Eskom was a captive market for McKinsey.  Chairman, I 
grew up to have a very good appreciation of McKinsey.  I 
like that competencies and in certain instances I was the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 31 of 260 
 
one who brought them into specific projects on a sole(?) 
source(?) basis and I was not the only one.   
 
The Top Engineers Programme is my programme.  
I started it in 2011/2012.  The first call(?) was 2013/2014.  
And I had a big dream and my dream was simple.  I said to 
the McKinsey – the top man in McKinsey, I am – you have 
been doing business in Eskom for a long time and I want to 
have 
a 
difficult 
conversation 
with 
you. 
 
And 
this 
conversation is the one that says at that point - and it is 
not a joke Chair – at that point Eskom was spending close 
10 
to R 5 billion a year on consultants and McKinsey was 
having a big share of it. 
 
I said I want to give you a contract to train and 
build my top engineers and those top engineers, we will 
call them Top Engineering consultants and they will replace 
you.  He left.  So they – and I am going long but that is the 
point.  So I struggled to see why McKinsey would want to 
tag along Regiments.  I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think Mr Seleka is the other way 
around. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You should be saying, you do not 
understand if that is the case, why Regiments would 
approach 
Eskom 
for 
work 
and 
still 
would 
rely 
on 
...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 32 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   That is my point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I struggle to see how Regiments will come to 
Eskom and say:  Give me work, I have got McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, would they not do that Mr Koko if 
they know that you want to give opportunities to black 
firms, black companies and they say we are black?  We 
see that you know McKinsey.  They have been doing a lot 
10 
of work for you.  So we know you and trust them.  But now 
we want you to give us work but you will have the comfort 
of knowing that behind us we have got people whose 
experience and competence you trust.  
 
The only difference now is that that they will 
come behind.  We will be at the flanks.  Whereas all along 
they have been in the front and they have been alone. 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair, we will not do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   We will contract with McKinsey. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I am asking whether there 
would be anything wrong if they – if their reasoning was 
along those lines? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether or not ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 33 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Oh, no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
[Speakers intervening each other – unclear] 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I would not even entertain that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   It is hogwash, actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   It is nonsense. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I will not entertain that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR KOKO:   I will say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why? 
MR KOKO:   I will say to them I will contract with 
McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   McKinsey brings different BEE players 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...to Eskom. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   I will not tell McKinsey who to bring. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   McKinsey – the company I was very familiar 
with that McKinsey used in Eskom at that – in most of the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 34 of 260 
 
times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   In most of the material times McKinsey and 
Eskom, it is a company called McKinsey Letstima(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m?  Yes. 
MR KOKO:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So they have – for some time they had 
been bringing ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...a BEE partner. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   And the different partners. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   So I would not accept ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   ...somebody who say:  Give me a job.  I will 
bring ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   ...McKinsey. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is now – I – is that because 
McKinsey’s expertise and experience was at a certain high 
level ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Regiments is not McKinsey... 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  [laughs]   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 35 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Everybody would understand that but the 
– I mean, you had set, I imagine, McKinsey, you must bring 
a BEE partner. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So in that scenario McKinsey is 
the main ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...contractor. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So at what stage in terms of your 
own approach would you allow the situation to start being 
reversed, where you can see black firms being brought into 
the main contractors? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, my game plan was simple. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because – let me finish.  Because I 
imagine that when one talks about BEE and transformation 
and so on, and when you say a white firm must bring a BEE 
partner, the idea must be that the BEE partner must 
actually get exposure and ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR KOKO:   Must transition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...experience and transfer of skills.  
There must come a time, at some stage, where that BEE 
partner 
can 
contract 
with 
Eskom 
without 
the 
white 
contractor.  So now, that is why I am asking you the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 36 of 260 
 
question.  If you say you would never contract with 
Regiments or Trillian in that situation because there is 
McKinsey, at what stage must the black firms always come 
be brought in by the white contractors or there would come 
a time where you can say I can teach the white contractor, 
I can teach McKinsey because there is a black firm that 
has got expertise and experience that is better find for this 
job?   
 
Or you could say, the two can partner but they 
can come as equal partners now.  Now the black firm does 
10 
not have to be, you know, just be brought along.  They can 
come as equal partners to Eskom.  So at what stage would 
that happen? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, yes.  You know, we had done something 
beautiful at Eskom and one of the things that happening 
was listening to doctor – Mr Mabuza, sitting here and 
saying the Top Engineers Programme never existed.   
 
So I sat with my team at McKinsey and I looked 
at the scope of consulting engineers and I said – we came 
to 
a 
conclusion 
that 
we 
actually 
need 
hundred 
top 
20 
consultants at the level of McKinsey in-house in Eskom.  
And we set a development programme and selected them 
and we actually seconded them to McKinsey to train as 
McKinsey 
partners 
and 
they 
worked 
with 
McKinsey 
wherever they went.  I remember they spent a lot of time at 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 37 of 260 
 
Petro SA.   
 
And at one point, I think when I left Eskom, there 
were around 30 and we were growing them to a hundred.  
And my expectation was that by the time we get to a 
hundred, the R 5 billion that we will spend into Eskom, we 
will not spent it anymore.  We will do the work in-house.  
That was my plan.   
 
So I did not expect Trillian or Regiments to 
transition to contract ...[indistinct].  In fact, I was – my 
plan with the Top Engineers was to do everything in-house.  
10 
And ...[indistinct] arose and may – was making more 
important by the National Treasury’s practice note. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, I understand that completely 
and I think it probably is quite commendable to aim for that 
objective and it is good for Eskom but talking about 
transformation in general and not focussing on Eskom, the 
question I had to put to you is.  Why would you not reach a 
stage where you can say:  I can contract directly with a 
black firm and not have a white firm or have both of them 
come to Eskom as equal partners. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am going back to the question of –  
MR KOKO:   No, let me answer ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let me hear your answer. 
MR KOKO:   No, let me answer you directly because we 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 38 of 260 
 
have done something about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   We have done it in the engineering space and 
we have done it in the management space.  So we had a 
tender 
for 
example 
and 
on 
both 
engineering 
and 
management spaces and we called them panels, Panel A 
will be the McKinsey’s international guys.  We have Panel 
B and Panel C.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And put them in Panel B. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   What I am saying to you is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   No, no, no Chair.  No, no, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   We had a process where the Panel C will 
transition to Panel A.  So I had ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was a plan for growth 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and upgrading? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  I know – if you go into the engineer 
space, they will tell you.  We came in as Panel C’s and 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 39 of 260 
 
now we are in Panel A.  Now we are competing with 
everybody else. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  So I guess your answer, 
therefore, is, to my question.  Yes, they would reach a 
point where we could contract as Eskom with the black firm 
without a firm ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Oh, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...without a white contractor.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And would also – would you also answer 
in the affirmative to say there could be – we could have a 
situation where they come as equal partners? 
MR KOKO:   In fact, McKinsey will testify, if you put it to 
them, that when – you realise that when we – with the 
Eskom procurement says 30% to BEE and I want – I have 
also pushed them to 50/50. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   That you must come in, go select a competent 
black consulting company and come 50/50 with them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   I experienced a lot of pushback most of the 
time and I did not succeed but in one or two instances I 
had. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  So I guess that, maybe this might 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 40 of 260 
 
be a revision of your previous answer, when you said that 
no you would not contract with Regiments or Trillian, you 
would contract with McKinsey. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, at that stage Regiments was not at the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, your answer should be, in 
principle you would have no problem ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...with contracting with Trillian or 
Regiments or a black firm if you were satisfied that they 
10 
have the expertise and experience. 
MR KOKO:   Of course, of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is just that this particular one, you 
knew that they did not have that. 
MR KOKO:   No, I did not even know them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you did not even know them? 
MR KOKO:   I did not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I did not even know them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  [laughs]   
20 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   The first Regiment person that interacted with 
was Matshepo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 41 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   And let me tell you.  She came across as a 
very – I do not want to come out bad, I do not want to hurt 
– to do harm to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you had good things to say about 
your impression of her. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   And that is why I do not want to be 
misunderstood. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:   She came across as very potential but not 
there yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know whether in the process 
your question was answered but I may have taken Mr Koko 
to other issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, let us see - you see what I was 
20 
putting to you is a witness version not a hypothetical 
situation, so: 
“The witness…” 
That is Mr Matshela. 
“...invited me to a meeting.  In that meeting Mr 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 42 of 260 
 
Salim Essa showed up.  Mr Salim Essa was offering 
to do the service.  I asked him whether they have 
capacity.  His response was, we work with McKinsey 
from time-to-time.” 
It is not a hypothesis I am putting to you, it is a version of 
this witness that Regiments was making this offer to Eskom 
against the background of having McKinsey as their 
partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and in order to timeframes do you 
want to just say when that was? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I remember that is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is around April 2014. 
MR KOKO:   It should be ’14, Chair.  I remember that 
incident. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   I remember this incident well because I was 
the procurement person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And I was one of the persons that Mr Molefe 
20 
shared the experience with.  And, Chair, contrary to many 
stories, you know, I listened to the President talking about 
deployment and state capture.  I was interviewed for my 
job by Mr Matona, Mr Marokane and Mr Molefe.  I was 
not… 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 43 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean you were not recommended by 
the deployment committee. 
MR KOKO:   I was not recommended by the deployment 
committee, I did not work for the ANC, I work for the state. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but of course the President did say 
that the deployment committee when it comes to SODs only 
deals – they make recommendation, on his version, in 
regard to CEOs and I think members of the board. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he restricted it to that level. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair, I would have been aggrieved if I 
was a product of a political formation.  I worked over 30 
years of my life, I was recognised by my peers globally as 
a leader in engineering [indistinct].  I was a corporate 
consultant at Eskom.  I was the most senior engineer at 
Eskom, nobody was higher than me in engineering and I 
will be very aggrieved – let me put it this way, I worked for 
the state, I did not work for the party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   But, Chair, I remember Ms Molefe’s story, 
20 
evidence, and I may have missed the evidence but I know 
the story very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes. 
MR KOKO:   And at that point I am one of the people who 
supported her that show these people the finger.  Process-
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 44 of 260 
 
wise we cannot do what they want us to do and I was proud 
that she was able to pull it through and it was very difficult.  
I remember her meeting with the board members and I am 
happy at the time Mr Mkhwanazi supporting her and Mr – 
Ms Bonnie [indistinct] Dr Bonnie [indistinct] supporting her 
and she did the right thing.  All they have done is 
[indistinct]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  But then, Mr Koko, after she was 
essentially removed as the CFO, as the FD of Eskom in 
2015 we see that Regiments is able to partner with 
10 
McKinsey and do exactly what they sought to do under her 
tenure which is this funding plan in respect of the 
corporate plan and that appointment of McKinsey, you 
signed the letter, McKinsey then partnered with Regiments 
and Regiments rendered services which, on Ms Mosilo’s 
version, these are services that “we had to go to Eskom 
officials to help us do this funding plan.”  That is 
Regiments.   
On the other hand, McKinsey official says “we had 
not been contracted before to do corporate – or the funding 
20 
plan for the corporate plan.  Eskom’s officials had done it 
all the time.”  So they had the capacity to do it.  But here 
under your watch, with Mr Singh, Regiments gets the 
contract.  How do you explain that to the Chairperson? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I am glad this question is raised.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 45 of 260 
 
Mr Seleka says “under your watch” Regiments got a 
contract with Eskom.  Chairman, on the 29 June 2015 
NERSA 
made 
a 
determination 
to 
reject 
the 
Eskom 
application for what we called a selectively opener.  I said 
previously when I was here that up to that time the 
business plan, that Mr Seleka is talking about, was based 
on what we call a cost reflective tariff and all what it meant 
is that Eskom will have a wish list, that wish list will be 
translated into cost and all those costs will be covered by 
the tariff, the cost reflective tariff, that is a business plan 
10 
that Mr Seleka is talking of.   
 
Post 
28 
June 
2015 
when 
NERSA 
rejected 
a 
selectively opener of 52.8, Chairman I even – I brought the 
announcement for NERSA because if Mr Seleka did not 
raise it, I was going to raise it, that is part of my story and 
my counsel has it as well. 
 
Eskom could not rely on the tariff to cover its 
wishes.  So we needed a mindset change that says instead 
of a corporate plan that is based on a cost reflective tariff, 
we need a corporate plan that is based on the design to 
20 
cost and that cost is the cost that NERSA gives us.  It is a 
big [indistinct], Chair.  It says Eskom, forget what you 
want, man, forget your wish list, the regulator gave you the 
cost, design your operations within that cost.  Eskom has 
never done that.  So whoever says Eskom people are 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 46 of 260 
 
capable of doing that, is just – it is not supported by the 
evidence.  So we, prior to that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was a new way of doing things. 
MR KOKO:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As dictated by the regulator. 
MR KOKO:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And previously things had been done 
differently.   
MR KOKO:   Yes.  You know, it is like your son coming – 
my son coming back from school, says I want this, I want 
10 
this, I want that, and then I come back and say you know 
what, [indistinct], my son is [indistinct], I used to work for 
Eskom, Eskom used to pay handsomely, you could afford to 
go to Dubai with your mom, this time you can only go 
Swaziland because I do not work, you are going to have to 
live within that constraint.   
It was a painful process and let me tell you, there 
was a big, big push back from Eskom because Eskom 
people – Eskom mindset, you see it even today, Eskom 
mindset is there – and Chairman, the Optimum proposal, 
20 
that Mr Seleka is so passionate about, will present its 
opportunity to deal with it.   
Eskom is my – I guess it is always [indistinct], we 
are a government-owned entity, we can take the Optimum 
proposal, however expensive it is, government will fight 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 47 of 260 
 
with us but ultimately they will bail us out.  Government 
will always bail us out, government has always bailed us 
out.  
You know, there is a case now – and Chairman, this 
is where I get upset and there is a case now similar to 
Optimum, similar to Glencore, it is called South32, South32 
is now Seriti.  They go to Eskom, they have got the same 
fixed price contract over 40 years.   
Now they go to Eskom and they have learnt from 
Seriti – they have learnt from Optimum.  They go to 
10 
Optimum and say we are in hardship and we want to 
increase our costs from R2.66 per ton to R550 per ton over 
the life of the contract and the numbers that I read in the 
newspapers is that it is going to cost Eskom an additional 
R40 billion and Eskom is saying we must do it.   
National Treasury says you cannot do it.  So 
National Treasury is becoming the Koko over time.  So the 
problem with Eskom today and the problem with the team 
that Mr Seleka is talking about is that they worked on the 
basis that says listen – you know, it is a matter of time, 
20 
they will get angry, they will insult us but when they 
[indistinct] and they see the lights going off they will bail 
us out.  I came back from suspension, I got the message 
very clear.  Chairman …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can we deal with that later, Mr Koko? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 48 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no, we cannot, this is at the heart of it 
because they corporate plan, all what the corporate plan 
meant was go and design your operations to fit to the cost 
of NERSA.  So there was a need, one. 
 
Two – and Chairman, my counsel also brought the 
minutes and we will not go home, we will even sleep here 
until you look at those minutes of the 26 February 2015 
that deals with the financial position of Eskom.   
We will also look at the minutes of the 22 July 
2015.  I know them, I lived them, I managed them, they are 
10 
on my fingertips.  We then had to contract McKinsey who 
have been developing this on the sidebar and do this on 
the - in the centre line.  We contracted with McKinsey.  We 
did not contract with Regiments. 
 
So I take exception that Mr Seleka has put to me 
that “under your watch you contracted with Regiments.”  I 
did 
not 
contract 
with 
Regiments, 
I 
contracted 
with 
McKinsey.  I put a requirement to McKinsey that 30% of 
your work must be on a BEE partner.   
At that point the letter that I signed, again on the 29 
20 
September 2015, did not say to McKinsey I am contracting 
to you, the 30% must be Regiments.  It did not.  It could 
have been [indistinct] Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure that I understand 
why the Eskom team that had always worked on the basis 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 49 of 260 
 
of what you referred to as wish list, why if they had the 
right technical qualifications and materials they would not 
be able to work on the basis of a certain cost determined 
by the regulator to say this is the cost.  Whatever you do 
you must know this is the cost.  Are you able to throw light 
on that? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes.  It is a legacy issue.  Eskom – there 
is 
a 
monster 
called 
electricity 
pricing 
policy. 
 
The 
electricity pricing policy says that Eskom costs have to 
migrate to a cost reflective tariff.   
10 
I think they give time over five years.  Now, the 
Eskom people have taken that to heart and they would 
resist anything that deviates to the electricity pricing 
policy.  So when you go to them and say guys, here is the 
MIPD3.   
The MIPD3, we had to – requested revenue of R1.1 
trillion.  NERSA has granted us R885 billion of that R1.1 
trillion.  We are now short R225 billion. 
 
So ordinarily if we assume that we have a very 
competent 
regulator, 
the 
regulator 
has 
competently 
20 
decided that we must leave over the MIPD3 period with 
R885 billion and not R1.1 trillion.  The pick push within 
Eskom, it says NERSA is mad.  NERSA is mad, we will 
rather go to court, if needs be.   
And you have that big pushback and I used to say 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 50 of 260 
 
to Brian and others that, you know, one of the things we 
needed was external person who has not grown within 
Eskom but technically was competent to say guys, we have 
a regulator.   
The regulator is competent, the regulator is looking 
at the interests of the consumer and the interests of 
Eskom.  He has looked at our wish list, has listened to the 
consumers, has made a decision.  Have a mindset change, 
change, you smell the coffee.  Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was a question of mindset. 
10 
MR KOKO:   It is a mindset, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are saying that they were too 
used to doing things in a certain way and that had resulted 
in a certain mindset which would have made it difficult for 
them to address – to deal with this post the regulator ’s 
determination properly. 
MR KOKO:   Exactly.  And we did not have time, Chair.  
Remember that we had to – we had to submit the business 
plan in February 2016 and the board meeting that took that 
decision was on the 22 July.  And we had to do all that and 
20 
submit the business plan by February.  We just did not 
have the time. 
 
The Eskom people, once you - you know, the term I 
used at Eskom, once you become unreasonable with them, 
eventually they see the light, eventually they see the light. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 51 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR KOKO:   That this business is not going to change. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  We are at twenty five past, do 
you want to use the last five minutes and then we take the 
tea break? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chair, that was going to be my 
proposal. 
MR KOKO:   So, Chair, I take exception that I contracted 
with Regiments under my watch.  I object to that.  I 
contracted with McKinsey and I did not tell McKinsey who 
10 
they must bring.  They could have easily brought in 
Letsema, they could have easily brought in anybody. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I do not think Mr Seleka said you 
contracted with Regiments, I think he still said you 
contracted with McKinsey but why must I speak for him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair, thank you.  The fact of the 
matter is your appointment of McKinsey, Mr Koko, that 
appointment ultimately led to McKinsey bringing Regiments 
on board.  I have got two more questions for you and then 
we move on. 
20 
 
One, arises from that list you were talking about, 
you and Ms Suzanne Daniels and Chair, I want us to 
quickly go there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because Mr Koko has said his 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 52 of 260 
 
handwriting is – I mean, that is his handwriting on that list 
and that is Eskom bundle 8(a) on page 87.88 and Mr Koko, 
can I explain because I do not know the basis on which you 
I am passionate about the Optimum proposal and you 
taking exceptions to some of the questions put to you.   
The questions are meant to give the opportunity to 
respond to what appears from the evidence to be what took 
place.  Sorry?  87.88.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think we must just take the tea 
break.  Ja, because he is taking long to – let us take the 
10 
tea break, we will deal with the questions when we come 
back.  It is now half past, so it has taken five minutes.  So 
they can look for the right page during the tea break.  So 
when we come back you can then pose the question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea break, we will 
resume at quarter to twelve. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chairperson.   Yes, 
Chairperson just before we adjourned, I was referring to 
page 87.88 on that Eskom bundle, page Mr Koko. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 53 of 260 
 
 
Just maybe one question Mr Koko from this, against 
the project, named Project Elibra Angelo there is a 
handwriting 
there 
“we 
could 
buy”, 
since 
it’s 
your 
handwriting, maybe you can help us there.  Then there’s 
TBC and the handwriting again it says, “give me a fixed 
price I give you the partner”, could you explain to the 
Chairperson what you meant about this, and to whom was 
this statement directed. 
MR KOKO:   Excellent.  Chair I - for one of my CV’s I did a 
concept design that cited Kusile ...[indistinct] so when our 
10 
grandchildren grow up, they will be told it was Mr Koko who 
decided, amongst others that that power station is cited 
there. And there was a reason for that, and that reason 
was no different to the – what Eskom has done in the past.  
You look for where the coal is, you find the coal and that’s 
where you build the power station and then you build a 
power station, you build a mine, you put a conveyor you 
transport the coal via the conveyor, it’s always cheaper to 
put coal on a conveyor than to put on the road.  That is the 
only reason why Kusile is there.  The coal field that is 
20 
there was owned by Anglo American, it was called New 
Largo.  One of the mistakes we did, and there’s a reason 
for that but it’s not for this purpose, was that we build a 
power station before the mine was there.  That, you 
normally don’t do, normally you complete the mine and 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 54 of 260 
 
then you build a power station and the power station was 
built and then we started the discussions to develop the 
mine and one of the discussions Ms Daniels brought to me 
was the development of New Largo and there were prior 
discussions with Mr Marukane who was doing the job 
before me and Minister Gigaba, they were prolonged and 
basically there was nothing happening but this note was 
saying to – well before I go to the next, then we have an 
industry that we developed in 2008 on the basis of the 
2008 coal mandate which we’ll come to when we deal with 
10 
it later.  We had 2000 trucks on the road, two problems 
with them they were very expensive, and they were killing 
people on the road.  The fatalities of non Eskom employees 
on the road was just too high and they were just too 
expensive, so we started building a line, we call it a 
…[indistinct] line and it was under the project called, “road 
to rail migration strategy”.  So, we were building a railroad 
to our – to Majuba and we were removing – and the plan 
was that once that rail is removed, we will remove the 
trucks from the road to rail.  Now, here is the issue that 
20 
was pertinent at this time.  What do we do with the coal 
truckers, 2000 a day of them once we are finished with this 
line?  We have created this industry we need to just 
transition, that’s the term I used, we adjust transition that 
we build the rail we put coal on the rail, but we find 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 55 of 260 
 
something 
to 
do 
for 
these 
coal 
truckers 
which 
had 
organised themselves under an organisation, they call it, 
TCF Coal Transportation Forum…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, the truckers, was – did that refer to 
the 
owners 
of 
the 
trucks 
or 
the 
drivers 
or 
the 
workers…[intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   No, the owners of the trucks, the owners. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The owners, okay. 
MR KOKO:   So, now when Ms Daniel came to me with New 
Largo, she wanted to do a cost plus mine like we’ve done 
10 
with others, I said, no, not a chance, not in my time.  You 
know, I listened to Mr Clinton Ephron taking you for a ride, 
you know it’s amazing when you don’t come from this 
industry how people who are the benefactors take you for a 
ride, trying to justify to you that the cost plus mines, in 
today’s terms are the best for Eskom.  In my affidavit, 
when I wrote my affidavit, I was saying to my wife, I’m 
writing a thesis in my affidavit”, so that people – the 
engineers that are starting to work at Eskom today, when 
they lay their hands on my affidavit it’s a thesis for them, I 
20 
write a lot, I like writing they must learn something out of 
it.  So, I devoted a chapter and a verse in my main affidavit 
about the value of cost plus mine and a fixed plus mine.  
That a fixed plus mine only makes sense in that time when 
Eskom’s 
sovereignty 
was 
– 
in 
a 
time 
when 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 56 of 260 
 
Eskom…[indistinct] was better than the sovereign vetting 
and Eskom cost of capital was cheaper.  So, Eskom can 
then raise capital and build a mine, it made sense then.  I 
can tell you now, Chair, there will not be another cost plus 
mine, they will never …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it will be more expensive? 
MR KOKO:   Because it will be more expensive.  The 
people who say to you, cost plus mines are better are the 
Clinton Ephron’s because they’re the benefactors, it’s the 
Executives, they are the benefactors but let me tell you, 
10 
whether they like it or not, the economics will dictate, 
Eskom will never have another cost plus mine and this is 
the note here.  I’m saying to Suzanne, give me a fixed 
price we’re not doing any cost plus mine here.  The only 
time, Eskom will do New Largo is not on a cost plus mine 
it’s on a fixed plus but go and tell Anglo we’ll give them a 
partner, we’ll give them a partner and we will follow the 
process but that partner will be those 2000 truck owners 
that are driving our – that we have on the road everyday 
that we are going to remove once the…[indistinct] are 
20 
finished, we can’t leave them, we can’t leave them on the 
streets, we have to create  - I mean there were 2000 truck 
drivers a day each driver multiplied by two or three will be 
about 3000 households plus the owners of the trucks, we 
can’t leave them on the streets.  We – and I was really 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 57 of 260 
 
passionate about this and it collapsed after I left.  We are 
going to take these people, you know I’ve done the same 
with Erna …[indistinct] I’ll tell you about Erna.   
 
We’re going to take all these truck owners, they 
must organise themselves into a company and they are 
going to own New Largo within Anglo American, they are 
going to be the BEE of New Largo, that’s the partner.  Just 
to divert quickly, I’ve done the same on Arnot and I see in 
the affidavit of Godjo he writes about it, he doesn’t tell the 
truth.  When we closed Arnot and there was a Mooifontein 
10 
surface right I said to Exxaro, take the former Exxaro 
employees, put them into a company, let them own the 
company I will then make sure that they get the contract, 
they are there now and it’s one of the legacy projects I’m 
proud of.  Eskom must just give them the contract, then 
you’ve got the employees who work the mine being the 
owners of the mines, it will be a great pleasure for me to 
have these 2000 – these owners of 2000 truck drivers 
being the BEE of Anglo American on a fixed cost mine.  So, 
the question is, who did I direct it to? I directed this to 
20 
Anglo American, they must give me a fixed price I will give 
them the partner and the partner will be the owners of the 
trucks that we will remove. The partner will be the TCF 
which are the owners of the truck drivers that we will 
remove on the road when Majuba Rail is fixed.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 58 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay just repeat who you directed it to? 
MR KOKO:   This is directed to Anglo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Anglo? 
MR KOKO:   Anglo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who were the owners of…[intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   New Largo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   You give me a fixed price I will not agree a 
10 
cost plus mine, you give me a fixed price and I will give 
you a partner and the partner will be these truck drivers, 
this industry that I’ve built that will be redundant, not all of 
them will be redundant because not all the coal will be 
going to Majuba but 90% of the coal is going to Majuba.  
Majuba is a power station that does not have a mine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  So, Mr Koko, what 
you are telling the Chairperson is that you would give a 
BEE partner to Anglo? 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I thought that’s something you don’t 
do, I couldn’t hear your evidence earlier? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, we don’t do it, we generally don’t do it. 
In my lifetime at Eskom, there were two instances in my 25 
year life at Eskom – sorry there was only one this would 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 59 of 260 
 
have been the second one, no this was this first one.  The 
Arnot one was the second one, so we’ve done it only twice, 
we will do it only twice and the first one was Arnot, and 
this will be the second one and there is an operational 
need for that.  I mean, take Arnot for example, Arnot had a 
coal supplier agreement with Eskom for 40 years for 40 
years we had Arnot employees there.  
Now, the contact comes to an end, it’s not cancelled 
so you – again you will see in the affidavit of Mr 
…[indistinct] it says cancelled, it’s not cancelled, 40 years 
10 
has come, it comes to an end.  What do you do with the 
people that are there that have been part of Arnot for 40 
years? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, bearing in mind that these are ISU 
business people, the truckers. 
MR KOKO:   Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, these are business people why 
should you, as Eskom, decide that they should be partners 
to a particular transaction to a particular project?  Why 
should they – why should you not allow a situation where 
20 
they compete with whoever to be partners and then 
whoever succeeds, succeeds, it could be them it could be 
somebody else as long as there are justifiable reasons or 
the one that succeeds, then that’s fine? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, this is not Eskom, this is not just 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 60 of 260 
 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   So, it is not Eskom.  We – if we had to 
implement this, we’ll have to go through the governance 
process and this type of transaction will need a Section 54 
Notice with the National Treasury’s approval.  So, it would 
have to be approved along those lines, so Eskom has not 
made this decision, these are my ideas that I would have 
to motivate to the Board and finally National Treasury, but I 
felt that we have an obligation of creating business 
10 
continuity for this industry that will just collapse. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, I would have thought that your 
approach ought to be, whoever – we can’t determine, in 
advance, who should be the BEE partner okay but all we 
can do is, insist that there should be a BEE partner but 
how that BEE partner is selected is none of our business, 
maybe I’m putting it – not in the best way but as long as – 
maybe the best that you could do is to alert them that is 
the truckers, that this is what’s going to happen, you might 
with to put yourselves in a position where you would 
20 
compete with whoever, if there is to be a partner that will 
be taken, a BEE partner…[intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman that’s how we operated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   That principle we applied.  We would resist 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 61 of 260 
 
imposing BEE partners on any supplier of Eskom, there 
have been attempts to force us in that direction and it 
would not fly…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You rejected that? 
MR KOKO:   We rejected that we would not do it.  The 
case of New Largo and I’m not talking about Arnot because 
it will look like a distraction I don’t want to look like – you 
to be distracted, was unique.  For some reason and 
obviously before my time, we created this industry and it 
was not created out of a competitive environment, there 
10 
was nothing competitive about it when it was created and 
on many occasion, we wanted to stop it because it was not 
even cheap.  You may remember, in one State of the 
Nation address they blocked Pretoria, they have done that 
twice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I seem to remember something in the 
news and TV…[Intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, they’ve done that twice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   One of the fall-out I had with the Primary 
20 
Energy Group Executive which eventually led to her resign 
was the manner in which the coal truck transporters were 
handled because they had the potential of seriously 
destabilising Eskom’s operations, they were a pain and we, 
at a personal level, had  Managing Generation of going to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 62 of 260 
 
Managing Generation at that time.  I knew that one of the 
things I have to do quickly was to make sure that the 
construction of Majuba Rail gets finished as soon as 
possible and that’s close to 14million tons of coal a year 
and one of my key success factors was to get the Majuba 
Rail done, it’s not done even now by the way it’s an 
indictment it’s not done but I did not want – I did not want 
to spend a lot of time dealing with the after effects of the 
Majuba Rail with the truckers, I did not want to do that and 
I – when I was talking to them, and I talk to them, by the 
10 
way, guys this things – and I started that conversation with 
them Majuba Rail is going to happen guys, whether you 
like it or not and there’s been toy toying’s about Majuba 
Rail, I say, you can toy toy with Majuba Rail it is a 
business and it’s imperative I am going to do it but there’s 
a silver lining for you.  You organise yourself, there’s New 
Largo coming, it’s the same industry, you take people, 
you’ll do that. Now, Chair, like I am saying to you, we don’t 
give BEE partners to Eskom suppliers, we don’t do it, but I 
thought this was exceptional circumstances to shut them 
20 
up and to give them hope. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you say, this was a deviation from 
the norm? 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say, the justification was that 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 63 of 260 
 
they could destabilise Eskom’s coal? 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
MR KOKO:   It’s said that New Largo is not developed by 
now by the way it’s very sad and I can tell you it’s one of 
the problems why Eskom costs will continue to run away. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Was that achieved Mr Koko or is that 
what you’re saying now? 
10 
MR KOKO:   No, New Largo is not – there’s no New Largo, 
even today. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh no I’m talking the transaction here, 
Anglo teaming up with the partner you were suggesting? 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair.  So, a couple of things have not 
happened. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Say again? 
MR KOKO:   A couple of things have not happened.  The 
Majuba Rail has not happened, New Largo has not 
happened and there’s a stalemate with the trucks now. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I was wondering, as you were 
explaining this, Ms Daniels says the list is yours, you say 
it’s hers and you go further to say, she was the one coming 
with this proposal of the cost plus mine in regard to that 
project.  Would it have been in her place to do that? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 64 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Of course, yes.  Chair, one of Ms Daniels’ 
lies…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I just say this, so that you can, 
comprehensively cover the question to the Chairperson.  
Remember this is the first day of your coming from 
suspension…[intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   No, it’s not the first day of coming back, that’s 
a lie, it’s not…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, let me finish, let me finish.  
According to her evidence this is the first day of your 
10 
coming 
from 
suspension 
and 
you 
have 
said 
to 
the 
Chairperson that by the time you came back, she no longer 
reported to you she had been moved to Dr Ngubane’s 
office and it is that context I’m asking you this question, 
whether it was in her place for you even to entertain what 
she was – what you say, she was proposing? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, it wasn’t her place. So, one of the 
things – and I’m just answering directly, and I want to give 
the Chair - it wasn’t her place.  To deal with that and to 
suggest that it was not here, in her place that’s when she 
20 
suggested that I was not her supervisor and if I was not 
her supervisor then it will not be in her place.  Then, she 
can’t give me a document – she can’t bring a document for 
me suggestions from the Chair and the Chair wants 
feedback and then I will entertain her because I’ll tell her, 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 65 of 260 
 
but you don’t work for the Chairman, you work for me, I 
must be the one talking to the Chair, you don’t work for the 
Chair.  That is why she deliberately tried to lie to you and 
she did that for two reasons, one was to cover up on the 
info portal address and the second one is this one because 
if I was her supervisor and she brings these documents I 
will say, what the hell, what is this and the Chairman must 
come talk to me if he needs feedback from me but now 
she’s in the office of the Chairman, her supervisor is the 
Chairman.  It’s well within her right to say, my boss wants 
10 
an update on this then I entertain her because it’s within 
her right, within her delegated authority to chase us around 
and she was doing, exactly that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, sorry Mr Koko, let me check 
whether I understand you correctly.  Are you now saying, 
Ms Daniels was coming to you with this list from the 
Chairperson? 
MR KOKO:   I always said that Chair, I always said that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you – and by that, what you mean is 
that,  at the time of her coming with this document to you, 
20 
she was already working in the Chairperson’s office? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and what was her position in that 
office again? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, she was, either still a Senior 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 66 of 260 
 
Manager in the Chairman or the company Secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   This conversation happened September/April 
when I was going to – when it was known that I’m leaving 
commercial. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, Chair let me just say, I’ve never 
head Mr Koko saying, the list came with Ms Daniels from 
the Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman I’ve always said that go check the 
10 
transcripts, I’ve always said that.  I said, she brought this 
to me saying her principals are looking for feedback and 
her principals is the Board or the Chairman, I’ve always 
said that, if you care to go and check…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I’m going to check that ja. 
MR KOKO:   If you go and check the transcripts, you’ll find 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, because her version is that it is 
you 
who 
said, 
your 
principals 
have 
asked 
you 
to 
20 
concentrate on this…[intervenes]. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, this matter can be easily resolved by 
just checking the transcripts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m no, no I think this last one is Mr 
Seleka saying what her version is. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 67 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   No, I listened to her, I watched her, so I know 
her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but your junior will try and check or 
somebody will try and check the transcripts. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We will check Mr Koko…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then, Mr Koko there is a name 
there…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but let’s just also get this.  You have 
said, Mr Koko, this document, you didn’t make these notes 
on it on the 20 t h of July when you came back you say it 
was in September 2015? 
MR KOKO:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I used the term, September/October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh September/October okay. 
MR KOKO:   It’s towards – it was known already by that 
time that I’m going to transition out of commercial to 
20 
Generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   And the basis of this, for me, I understood it 
but because I’m leaving her principals the Board, or the 
Chair is looking for feedback. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 68 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Well, my investigator 
has found a portion – well the transcript where Mr Koko 
talks about this on the 29 t h of March 2021.  Mr Koko I’ll 
read – that’s on page – I’ll start on page 181 of that 
transcript, I start with, I say,  
“Ja the question is simply this one, you don’t deny 
having a meeting with Ms Daniels in the morning of 
20 July, is that correct. Mr Koko says, Chair on the 
morning 
of 
the 
2015 
I 
have 
meetings 
with 
10 
all…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the morning of? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Of the 2015…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that’s how it’s written? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That’s how it’s written. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   “I have meetings with almost all my 
direct reports so I will not deny that I met Ms 
Daniels on that day.  I will not deny I met, I made a 
point that I need all my direct and by the way, Ms 
20 
Daniels was not my direct report on that day, but I 
will not deny having met her she was very important 
in my work, that I will not deny having that.  Yes, 
then it’s me, yes, you have said you got that list I’m 
talking about with the transactions, McKinsey being 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 69 of 260 
 
one of them, online vending being one of the, 
Duvha Three with the amounts you say, you got it 
from her, Mr Koko says correct.  Then I say, she 
said it was your list, Mr Koko says, no Chair I got it 
from her, and I can tell you now it was, even if I met 
Suzanne, I don’t deny meeting her on that day, in 
fact I’ll be very surprised if I did not meet her on 
that day. So, for all intents and purposes you can 
proceed on the basis that I met. It’s unlikely that I 
could not have met her, I just – so let’s proceed on 
10 
that basis Chair.  Mr Koko, he carries on, that one 
pager that we are talking about never arose on that 
day that one pager arose in the second half of 
October when I was about to leave my job as a 
Group Procurement Officer.  Then I say, yes, and 
you know that she has given evidence by way of a 
supplementary 
submission 
to 
the 
Parliamentary 
Portfolio Committee on this very aspect. Mr Koko 
says, yes, I do, and I carry on to say, and her 
version was, you said the list is of transactions that 
20 
your principals say that you must focus on.  So 
again, I put her version to you and Mr Koko says, 
she said that at the Parliament, I think she said it 
here too.  And your comment on that, Mr Koko says, 
it’s nonsense Chair, that I can tell you that’s blatant 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 70 of 260 
 
nonsense and then I said but you admitted that the 
handwriting on that list is yours, that’s correct 
Chair, that’s Mr Koko.  I say, when she was here 
last time around, she mentioned that, then there 
was an intervention there”. 
 
I know I’ve gone through the transcript, I haven’t – 
well I may be mistaken but I haven’t come across that she 
came with it from the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, there is a part you read earlier on 
where Mr Koko was saying she was not heard direct – I 
10 
can’t remember what word ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, a direct report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which may suggest that he was saying she 
was not under her – under him at the time.  There was that 
part I do not know –  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you want to go back to that part. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Mr Koko says: 
20 
“I met Ms Daniels on that day.  I will not deny I met; 
made a point that I will meet all my direct and by the 
way Ms Daniels was not my direct report on that day.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you meant? 
MR KOKO:  That is my point Chair. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 71 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja.  You might not – from what has – 
what has been read might not include any statement that she 
was already in the chairperson’s office but.. 
MR KOKO:  Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is the part which says she was not 
reporting to me. 
MR KOKO:  That is exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  That is what I – it is – I have consistently said 
that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Of course the – the one thing 
which emerges from that and I just want you to comment 
because maybe we can get it out of the way now is that 
whereas now you were saying it must have been about 
September – October when she came to you with this 
document what was read there seems to suggest that you 
were saying that it can be taken that you met her if regard to 
this document on the 30t h of July. 
MR KOKO:  No, no, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was my impression. 
20 
MR KOKO:  No, no it is very clear there it says October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh is – was that your impression?  I 
am –  
MR KOKO:  Chair if you can – then he must read again.  He 
must read again.  It clearly says October. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 72 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just read – read again.  I – I know that 
there might be reference to later but I thought most of the 
time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was a response to what Mr Seleka said 
namely that Ms Daniels says she met you on the 20 t h of July 
and from what he was reading that is Mr Seleka it seems that 
you were saying you will not deny that you met on that day 
or something like that. 
MR KOKO:  Chair – Chair it is – it is quite simple. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  I am saying to you – I am saying in the 
transcripts I cannot remember that I met Ms Daniels on the 
20t h but she was so important to me that it is unlikely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  That I did not have that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  So let us proceed on the basis that I have met 
her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja you say that ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:  I cannot imagine that I have not met her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I am also saying on that day she was not my 
direct report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do say so. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 73 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  But I am also saying in no ambiguous terms she 
must – Mr Seleka must read again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  That list came to me October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR KOKO:  And the reason I am mentioning October I am 
trying to – it is a time stamp for me when I leave.  I am 
saying I have just said to you earlier it is September/October 
because that is when I was leaving.  She – can he please 
read it Chair so that we put this to bed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  If – if his understanding is the same 
as yours it might not be necessary.  Is your understanding 
the same as Mr Koko’s? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair to – to some extent correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because I put to him Ms Daniels version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Which is that there was a meeting in the 
morning of 20 July 2015 when according to her version she 
saw the list Mr Koko holding and left it on the desk when he 
20 
was called by Mr Molefe.  He then sec – she then secretly 
made a copy and kept one.  So all that according to her is 20 
July 2015 the first day of Mr Koko.   
 
Mr Koko then admits the meeting and we should 
proceed on that basis but later says in the answering that 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 74 of 260 
 
the one pager arose in the second half of October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this the one pager? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This is the one pager. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay maybe I may have confused that 
when we were talking about – when you referring to a one 
pager I think I was thinking of another document that we 
have dealt with. 
MR KOKO:  No Chair this – this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under Eskom.  This is the same document? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This is the same. 
MR KOKO:  This was the document that was before you 
when I was answering that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  No, no that is fine.  I think you 
both should remember another document or was it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The two pager that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that was a two pager. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is a two pager. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is in December Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR KOKO:  That is the 10t h of December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  10t h of December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is alright.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 75 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Then Mr… 
MR KOKO:  You know there are things you cannot forget in 
this commission and you know one of them is the 19t h of 
February letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no the 19t h of February letter.  Ja is you 
see – you see Mr Koko I can see you – you listened – you 
listen and watch even when you are not giving evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He is studiously watching Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko then there is a name there.  On 
the left hand margin towards the bottom. 
MR KOKO:  Zestilor. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
Zestilor 
ja 
– 
Zestilor 
which 
we 
understood from Ms Daniels that it has been widely reported 
to be a company where Mr Salim Essa’s wife is a 
shareholder.  You could maybe enlighten the Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:  Yes I had that affidavit.  I was listening.  Chair 
when I do not remember the – what was this about I do not 
20 
know Zestilor Zestilor – I believe it is Zestilor.  I want to – 
(inaudible).  I do not have  
CHAIRPERSON:  But is it your handwriting? 
MR KOKO:  It is my writing yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh but you just cannot remember. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 76 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  No I cannot remember but remember Chair what 
is in here was a two way conver – was a record out of a two 
way conversation so I do not – I mean this – I think I do not 
even remember why I wrote stop paying T-Guys I do not 
know what. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well somebody I do not know if it was you 
but somebody or was it Ms Daniels who said T-Guys may 
have been T-Systems. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh is that where you are now Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Is that where the Chair is – that was my 
next question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I am – I know I am in the same 
page what you called the one pager but you see at the – 
there it is written stop paying T-Guys. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what Mr Koko is referring to. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He says he cannot remember what that 
20 
was about so I am saying to him I think somebody has given 
evidence saying if I recall correctly that T-Guys may have 
been a reference to T-Systems. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Ja. So – so… 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 77 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But has Mr Koko now finished addressing 
Zestilor? 
MR KOKO:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he – ja he says  
ADV SELEKA SC:  He cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is his handwriting but he cannot 
remember and I think he says he does not know the entity. 
MR KOKO:  I do not – I do not know the entity and I cannot 
remember why … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja why you wrote that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Then they are still paying T-Guys 
yes, no the Chairperson is correct the recollection is correct 
that Ms Daniels said the – this referred to T-Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  She may – she may have put it  
ADV SELEKA SC:  In a speculative. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not – ja – not so  
ADV SELEKA SC:  In a speculative manner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not so confidently she might ja – she may 
have speculated that it could be T-Systems. 
20 
MR KOKO:  Chair we never had a plain dispute with T-
Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  We never had any dispute of payment with T-
Systems. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 78 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you do not understand why – and is 
that the one also your handwriting? 
MR KOKO:  It is my handwriting on this F at the bottom I do 
not know what that means 
CHAIRPERSON:  What that F means. 
MR KOKO:  What that F means. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But we can ask a direct question Mr Koko 
who did you have in mind as T-Guys stop paying T-Guys. 
MR KOKO:  No I am saying I do not know – I do not 
remember who they are.  All what I am telling you is that if it 
10 
is T-Systems … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would not make sense. 
MR KOKO:  It will not make sense because – and then this 
is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You never had a pay dispute with them 
MR KOKO:  And this is something you can go back and 
check in the – based on records we never had a dispute with 
T-Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Chair we traversed this page last. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no we must not .. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I want to – I want to move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We must not repeat ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because – ja.  Mr Koko lastly on the 
Corporate Plan … 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 79 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  No before you – you go there Chair.  Mr Seleka 
made song and dance about … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But Chair can I say… 
MR KOKO:  I apologise. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The – the qualifications that I am 
passionate about something. 
MR KOKO:  I – I apologise Chair but I have to deal with this.  
I have to  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair. 
MR KOKO:  Chair I take it back. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Seleka. 
MR KOKO:  I take it back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is apologising now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  I take it back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but I think… 
MR KOKO:  If it will help us move a little bit… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – I think some of the gabs – some 
of the gabs are meant to try and – 
MR KOKO:  Ja (inaudible). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and in “deal with you “ 
MR KOKO:  I meant no harm Chair.  I meant no harm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Apology accepted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Chair the – the online vending  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 80 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  This commission has dealt with it for a long time 
and I have taken it seriously and I went to dig out the 
minutes.  You will remember it is one of the emails that I 
have sent to Dr Ngubane that he is denying and I know 
exactly what was going on there and I have said to you we 
had a commercial process that we ran – that was untainted.  
It started before I was suspended and when I came back 
unbeknown to me but I was briefed by my predecessor that 
there was a proposal from Blue Label.  Now in hindsight the 
10 
CEO of Blue Label was the board member of 00:11:00 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It was Mark Pamensky. 
MR KOKO:  Mark – Mr Mark Pamensky and I always qualify 
Chair that I do not suggest any form or level of impropriety 
Chair facing Mark Pamensky so please understand me.  I 
just find it an interesting coincident that they had decided 
that they will be the Master Vendor and they will pay Eskom 
upfront and we must dispense of the process that we 
rendered that was untainted.  And my meeting with Mr – with 
Dr Ngubane was said you cannot do it.  You just cannot do it. 
20 
And – and I – I suggested to you that if I was doing the 
bidding for the Gupta’s I would make sure it happens. I have 
brought the minutes of the board of February 2016 it clearly 
says there was change in strategy.  That change in strategy 
is still not complete and the best the board could do when 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 81 of 260 
 
the contract was to expand it by – to extend the existing 
contracts by a year to allow the board to sort out their new 
strategy that I refused to accept.  I told them you have to 
see those minutes Chair. 
 
Now and I am saying – 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no that is fine. 
MR KOKO:  I am saying to you that is not consistent with the 
behaviour of somebody doing the bidding for an external 
party.  That is just not consistent and the – what – and what 
I always try to address you on Chair is that there are 
10 
rumours and there is evidence. Please be persuaded by the 
documentary evidence before you  - when you finally make 
up your decision. There is too many rumours.  I have heard 
many rumours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
MR KOKO:  The documentary evidence must be the 
overriding issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  Two things.  You spoke 
earlier – much earlier when we were started about among 
other things Mr Abram Masango I forgot to mention to you 
20 
that I have asked the legal team to arrange for Mr Masango 
to come back so that he can give evidence but also he can 
be questioned about that meeting that you talked about.  The 
meeting that I think – is it Ms Goodson or Ms Mothepu? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Goodson.  Goodson Chair. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 82 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is Goodson ja so I just wanted to make – 
say that I have said that should be done.  Number 1.   
Number 2 I was going to say earlier on and I did not that I 
remember that last time among other things you mentioned a 
number of things maybe three – maybe four I am not sure 
which you said support which you said are inconsistent with 
the idea that you were doing the bidding of the Gupta’s or 
Salim Essa. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the board.  So you have mentioned one 
10 
of them now.  If at all possible I would like you to mention 
those in a – in a supplementary affidavit or document just 
say here are these things that I said are not consistent with 
me having been doing the bidding or whatever.  It is just that 
it will be convenient.  I know it will be in the transcript but if 
you can do that I would appreciate it. 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I will – I will do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR KOKO:  But the MSA is one of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
20 
MR KOKO:  It is always –  
CHAIRPERSON:  But what you … 
MR KOKO:  If I was doing the bidding for Mr Essa for the 
MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 83 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  I would not have said to Dr Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  We will not have this contract unless we get 
National Treasury’s approval otherwise we will do it on the 
fixed 00:15:15 it does not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think the other one who you said was 
– was this – at instruction maybe in inverted commas. 
MR KOKO:  To boycott Sunday Times. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About the newspapers. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  City Press, Mail & Guardian  
MR KOKO:  It did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So put an affidavit … 
MR KOKO:  It did not – it did not happen because I said I 
will not do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is what – that is what you 
mentioned so put – do an affidavit and say here are the 
things that are inconsistent with this idea that I was doing 
the bidding for the Gupta’s or Salim Essa and then 
substantiate as much as you – you are able to.  Let us have 
20 
that as a separate document. 
MR KOKO:  And just to say – just for something that is 
controversial. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  We could have done these things and I could 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 84 of 260 
 
have made sure that they are done legally if I was doing the 
bidding for them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  Because I was – I would bring my team in I say 
we do this thing legally. I – never do such a thing I would 
never clean up the mess. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright. 
MR KOKO:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Koko just two 
things and I want to move away from the Corporate Plan.  So 
10 
we have the evidence of Ms Mothepu. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay I think – for some reason in my 
ears that came wrongly.  You said you wanted to move away 
from the Corporate Plan sounded like you were saying you 
were moving away from the Koko Plan.  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Certainly from behind Chair.  We have 
the evidence of Ms Mothepu Mr Koko who says  
“Regiments had to…” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do I keep Bundle 8? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us – let us move it – move it away 
20 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  Thank you.  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  It is – the evidence of Ms Mothepu 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 85 of 260 
 
who says: 
“Mr Anoj Singh had requested this funding 
plan to be done over the weekend.  They did 
one he then rejected it and they had to turn 
to Eskom Treasury specifically Mr Andre 
Pillay to help them produce this funding plan.  
Mr Singh has also accepted I can use the 
word conceded before the commission also 
that the funding plan was a product.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Mr Koko have you got the right file in 
10 
front of you?  Are you looking for the right file? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No, no he is not… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He was putting away now. 
MR KOKO:  I was just putting away the file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. He does not need any file in front of 
him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No Chair.   
MR KOKO:  Not now 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Not now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now why do I need to have one then? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Not now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair we need to finish the evidence of 
Mr Koko.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 86 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So Ms – Mr Singh has also accepted to 
the Chairperson that the funding plan was a product of 
collaboration between the Eskom Treasury and the officials 
of Regiments.  Do you have any comment on that – that 
Eskom Treasury played a part if you take Ms Masilo’s 
evidence a significant part in the final product in respect of 
the funding plan? 
MR KOKO:  Chair I have no personal knowledge of that but I 
will be very surprised if the Eskom Treasury was not 
involved.  It would be a – an anomaly. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you.  And you are aware that 
Regiments was paid R30.6 million for working on that 
funding plan? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman I am aware that the invoice came to 
me and I refused to pay.  I have – even before the 
commission read on the newspapers that it was indeed paid. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Could you have done anything 
beyond just… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just – but I am sorry you said Regiments 
was paid? 
20 
MR KOKO:  No Trillian – no, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Trillian yes.  Trillian. 
MR KOKO:  Can I – can I rephrase? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that is fine. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 87 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but you started with Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  No Trillian was paid. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  For the work that was allegedly done by 
Regiments. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You are correct.  Could you have done 
10 
something more than just refusing to authorise the payment?  
Could you have stopped based on your explanation to the 
Chairperson of the reason why you refused Mr Goodson’s 
request that but we did not have a contract with Trillian could 
you have actually gone ahead to stop that payment from 
being made? 
MR KOKO:  No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And what is the reason? 
MR KOKO:  No so – so the way Eskom works Chair and 
again I have made this plea to you to go and get I called it a 
20 
policy in Eskom and called it Managing Contracts Insep.  
There is another one I would add to that it is called Accounts 
Payable Policy that is an Eskom policy.   
 
And the Eskom – both those documents were saying 
… 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 88 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  What I have been asking 
the legal team to get and I think that arises mainly from Mr – 
arose mainly from Mr Singh’s evidence but it might be 
connected with what you may have said previously also was I 
said a document – an Eskom document that would explain 
who has what responsibilities in the process that leads to 
payment of invoices. 
MR KOKO:  Yes.  Ja and those are the two documents I am 
(Talking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Those are the two documents. 
10 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one is saying. 
MR KOKO:  Managing Contracts Insep. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Managing Contracts. 
MR KOKO:  And Accounts Payable Policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  I know that you told me that you 
have received one of the documents but I do not know if that 
is what it is called. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One of these. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The Accounts Payable we have received 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have got that.  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And unfortunately we received – is it a 
statement or affidavit. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 89 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  From an Eskom official in the wee hours 
of this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So we have not shared it with Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So Accounts Payable is there and the 
Supply Chain Management Policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Which is the 1034. 
10 
MR KOKO:  The 1034 yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  1034. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one about Managing Contracts you do 
not have? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No this one we do not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Try and get that one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you must concede Mr Koko now that 
20 
when you raise issues they are followed up. 
MR KOKO:  Chair – Chair they will help but let me tell you 
what – how they will help. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  Is that people make up stories to condemn and 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 90 of 260 
 
criminalise 
people 
who 
have 
complied 
to 
the 
Eskom 
framework and I do not think it can – it is right and I have 
said it many times that up to now I have not been accused of 
not complying with the Eskom governance framework.  I have 
not.  Up to now I have complied with the Eskom governance 
framework and I have acted lawfully and I have – my action – 
I make decisions that I have took and I will explain to you 
where prudent policy – where prudent action in the interest 
of Eskom and I have again Eskom on the 15 t h of March and 
again this hurts me and it hurt it my wife too Eskom on the 
10 
15t h of March called a press conference and for the first time 
– for the very, very first time make an announcement that … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko can I make a plea to you with 
the Chairperson’s permission. I am going to run out time.- 
we are going to run out of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no actually I know you are right Mr 
Seleka because I interrupted you while you were giving an 
answer to his question. 
MR KOKO:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am responsible for this deviation. 
20 
MR KOKO:    It is fine but let me finish the sentence now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Eskom makes an announcement and it is for the 
very first time Eskom performance was the best in Koko’s 
time since 2010. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 91 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  So the challenge you have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you told me the challenge? 
MR KOKO:  Having done  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:  But here is the point Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  The answer to – to that is – the .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I want you to take you back to his 
question. 
10 
MR KOKO:  A – ja – a contract is placed and we call it a 45 
number – 45 number please keep that in mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mentioned that before. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  It is an Eskom jargon to simply say that there is 
a legitimate contract between me and you quoted 45 number.  
Then a contract manager is appointed, work gets done, when 
work is completed a completion certificate … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you – you explained that again.  I think 
20 
let us go back to what was your question? 
MR KOKO:  No I will answer you – I am answering that 
because I am not in the loop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  He has asked me for something. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 92 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I remember you explaining exactly 
that. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. I could have stopped it.  I am not in the 
loop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you must say there was nothing I 
could do to stop it. 
MR KOKO:  There was nothing I could do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Because I am not in… 
CHAIRPERSON:  If he suggests that there was something 
10 
you could do he will put it to you. 
MR KOKO:  Ja – and if I – to the contrary Chair I imposed 
myself I would have acting out – be acting irregularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  And if something happens then when I say he 
acted irregularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  He pretended to be a smart boy but now look so 
– I could not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
20 
MR KOKO:  I could not have done the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The answer is there is nothing more you 
could do. 
MR KOKO:  There is nothing more I could have done other 
than to say no.  I have said no twice.  Now I cannot stop 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 93 of 260 
 
people acting fraudulently and Chair we will come back to 
this and here Mr Seleka is not going to rush me because the 
last invoice that was paid for McKinsey that was – that came 
as a motivation on the 17t h of February it was paid on the 
21s t or the 22n d of February have got a very serious problem 
to me – very, very serious problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us continue.  From your side Mr Koko 
make note of matters that he might not cover in his 
10 
questions that you would want to address. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that later on you can (talking over one 
another). 
MR KOKO:  But the answer to that is that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you could not have done anymore. 
MR KOKO:  I could not have done anything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR KOKO:  Other than to say - simply say no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Okay.  Well your elaboration 
triggered another question because you were saying you 
cannot – you cannot stop people from acting fraudulently. 
MR KOKO:  No, no but I – that was a deliberate choice of 
words maybe an exaggeration but when we get to the invoice 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 94 of 260 
 
of the 22 nd to the invoice that was paid on the 22n d of 
February 2017. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  We will deal with that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us go – let us go into that Master 
Services Agreement.  So just to lay the ground the Master 
Services Agreement you say is one of the things you pride 
yourself in having drawn to the Chairperson’s attention that 
Eskom should not have concluded that agreement because 
they needed Treasury approval.  Correct? 
10 
MR KOKO:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The last time I asked you a question 
which led us to the emails of Ms Mothepu because I am 
going to put this to you so that you can address the 
Chairperson on that and I could go to the documentation if 
necessary Chair.  I do not know whether Ms Mothepu says 
you were the lead negotiator but what she shows in her 
emails is that she not only communicated with you by email 
but that she actually met with you in regard to aspects set 
out in the emails.  That is one. 
20 
 
Chairperson I think they can give you the file which is 
Eskom Bundle 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can they remove the one that … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Bundle – Bundle 14 I have got already. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 95 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  (d) (a) (b) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh brackets – there are brackets.  Bracket 
(c). 
ADV SELEKA SC:  (c). 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page – page 811.  811.255. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am on that page. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You are on that page.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the page that was opened in the 
morning. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay Chair.  Thank you.  So I am – I am 
just going to paint the picture of Mr Koko and  
MR KOKO:  2? 
CHAIRPERSON:  255. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  255.   
MR KOKO:  I am there Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja so the point is this – the point is this 
Mr Koko that – and we see this more prominently from Mr 
Aziz Laher’s affidavit that despite what you are saying now 
about the – this contract the MSA that it lacked National 
20 
Treasury approval for the appointment on a risk basis.  That 
requirement for National Treasury approval had been drawn 
to your attention and that you called Mr Aziz Lehar to a 
meeting and you were asking him:  But why are you 
delaying the conclusion of this agreement?  And he 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 96 of 260 
 
explained to you the reasons and you – which is the 
National Treasury approval.  And you said:  Well, you were 
going to get your own opinion.  
MR KOKO:   I like your gesture.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him finish, Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   I can see you cannot wait.  So.  [laughs]  
But let Mr Seleka finish first. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that that surprised him because if 
10 
an opinion was to be sought it would be Eskom Legal that 
would source an opinion which they ultimately did.  They 
got an opinion from one of my colleagues, Advocate 
Kennedy.  And he gave an opinion that you needed the 
National Treasury approval.  McKinsey went out of its way 
to get its own counter-opinion.  But leave that aside for a 
moment.   
 
The fact that this requirement was brought to 
your 
attention 
and 
nonetheless 
the 
Eskom 
officials 
including yourself went ahead to purportedly conclude the 
20 
MSA agreement with McKinsey and formed a Steering 
Committee which you were part of.  You attended meetings 
of that Steering Committee to deal with the services to be 
rendered under that master services agreement.   
 
So can you explain to the Chairperson why 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 97 of 260 
 
despite your knowledge of Treasury’s lack of approval 
would you have become part of that process that purported 
to conclude the agreement and even manage it in the 
Steering Committee? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I did not have to be – it did not 
have to be brought to my attention that we needed(?) 
National Treasury.  To the contrary.  It is me when I came 
back who drove the compliance to the National Treasury.  
And everyone involved in this project will tell you that the 
one – all the things that you have made – that make me 
10 
see red was National Treasury non-compliance and I have 
different reasons ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Non-compliance with National Treasury’s 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Non ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...instructions or ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...directives? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And there is a particular history with 
National Treasury.  I have a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which you made you to adopt that 
approach? 
MR KOKO:   Which made me adopt that approach. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 98 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And I will never take a risk with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:   Of course, I had a specific ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Experience. 
MR KOKO:   ...experience with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
Which 
the 
people 
in 
these 
meetings 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did not have. 
10 
MR KOKO:   ...did not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   So.  And I did not have to be reminded.  I 
have – I do not know Mr Lehar.  I know of him.  I do not 
recall a person with that nature in my office discussing 
this.  So I do not know this meeting he is talking about.  
Secondly, I would never – and Eskom processes, if you 
want to end up on the wrong side of Eskom, is to go to 
lawyers directly yourself.  Then I can tell you, you are – it 
is one way south.  So I would never ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say is to go to lawyers 
directly, what is the proper ways?  To go through the legal 
department? 
MR KOKO:   There is a Delegation of Authority in Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 99 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Instructions to external lawyers are given to 
Eskom Legal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   The corporate – we have got a Corporate 
Counsel and the Corporate Counsel at that time was 
Mr Noah Thulango(?)   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
So 
only 
Mr 
Noah 
Thulango 
briefed 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Outside lawyers. 
10 
MR KOKO:   ...outside lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
The 
affidavit 
of 
Mr 
Mabelane 
says 
Mr Thulango briefed the Eskom lawyers as Mr Mabelane 
and that is the right way to do it.  Mr Thulango – and I do 
not have his affidavit here – will tell you that he never 
interacted with me.  I never gave him a request to brief 
external lawyers.  I never did.  In fact, to the contrary.  The 
people involved are very opinion – say a lot about who did 
what.   
20 
 
So I do not why I am tracked(?) here because 
the affidavit of Mr Mabelane tells you exactly how lawyers 
– how external lawyers were briefed.  I could not tell 
Mr Lehar that I will get my own lawyers.  I will be 
dismissed.  It does not work that way.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 100 of 260 
 
 
So I do not remember having a meeting with 
Mr Lehar giving instructions.  I saw Mr Lehar ’s affidavit for 
the first time in my disciplinary at Eskom in 2013.  And I 
had to Google his name to check his ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   2013 ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2018. 
MR KOKO:   2018, I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR KOKO:   I had to Google his name to see his face 
10 
because I do not – I never ever in my 23-years – 24-year 
life interacted with a person called Mr Lehar.  He may have 
interacted with other, Mr Mabelane but me, never.  I had 
never.  I can tell you now.  And I would never go to source 
external opinion about it.  As a matter of fact, I did not 
even know of the legal opinion given by your colleague.  I 
never knew about it at the time.  I knew about it, I think the 
first time I came across it was on the Gupta emails.  I even 
never knew about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was your question, Mr Seleka, premised 
20 
on Mr Koko having had knowledge that there was an 
opinion which said Treasury’s required?  It was not 
premised on that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 101 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Anyway. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He has given an answer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if you want to take it further 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes-no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you may, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chair.  Because of that 
10 
answer, Chair.  Before we go to the Steering Committee, 
let us deal with this answer.  Chair, in that same file, look 
at the very beginning of that file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The very beginning of the file? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The very beginning of this file, 
Mr Koko.  Eskom Bundle ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   14. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   14. 
MR KOKO:   Page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That will be page – right at the 
20 
beginning.   
MR KOKO:   I must keep my hand here? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, you can do that.  That is – you will 
find in there an affidavit on page 702.235.   
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 102 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Right at the beginning.  The first 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The first is Dr Weiss’ statement.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 685. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then it means seven – sorry, Chair.  
702.235.   
MR KOKO:   [Speaker not close to microphone – unclear] 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Point 235. 
CHAIRPERSON:   702.35? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   235. 
CHAIRPERSON:   235? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Point 235, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Yes, that is the affidavit of 
Mr Abdul Aziz Laher.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Laher. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   And in paragraph 1.1, he says: 
20 
“I am an adult male employed by Eskom 
Holdings, the Senior Manager heading of the 
Group 
Compliance 
Office 
based 
on 
the 
Corporate Head Office at Megawatt Park...” 
 
Chairperson, then – Mr Koko also – please turn 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 103 of 260 
 
to – and I am trying to cut to the chase.  Please turn to 
page 702.264.   
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 At 
paragraph 
10.30, 
you 
see 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   [Speaker not close to microphone – unclear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, 702.264. 
MR KOKO:   [Speaker not close to microphone – unclear] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Paragraph 10.30.  Chair, he is 
given the background and Chair will read which leads up to 
10 
this. 
 
That 
around 
that 
time, 
between 
21 
to 
30 
October 2015, date not certain: 
“I was summonsed to Mr Koko’s office where a 
meeting was in progress involving Mr Koko, 
Mr Mabelane, Mr Govender, Mr Vicus Sagar 
and Mr Alexander Weiss, the last two being 
partners of McKinsey. 
Mr Koko asked me to explain why I was 
holding up his business with my view that the 
deviation application was required or he used 
20 
words to that effect and that he wanted the 
matter to be resolved by the end of the day. 
I 
explained 
the 
limitations 
in 
the 
2014 
instruction regarding how consultations could 
be consultants, could be remunerated and that 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 104 of 260 
 
the 
only 
way 
forward 
was 
a 
deviation 
application. 
I also mentioned that personally I have no 
problem with Aerospace Remuneration Model 
provided the measurement mechanism was 
objective and reliable or words to that effect, 
but the... structure had to be found(?). 
I put it plainly by way of a theoretical example 
that if McKinsey came up with an idea that 
would save Eskom billions that they only took 
10 
two 
hours 
to 
come 
up 
with 
it... 
2014... 
instruction they would only be paid for two 
hours’ work and based on a prescribed hourly 
rate. 
I asked McKinsey whether they had a view on 
whether the contract was in line with... rule 
since they had experience in the public sector. 
My impression from the meeting was that 
Mr Weiss admitted that in its present form the 
proposed contract could not get around the... 
20 
instruction. 
In any case, McKinsey undertook to prepare 
the memorandum on compliance with the... 
requirements. 
This was effectively a self-opinion. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 105 of 260 
 
Also, Mr Koko undertook to obtain external 
legal opinion himself on the matter. 
I have no objection to the seeking of an 
external legal opinion. 
I stuck to my interpretation of the 2014... 
instruction but all the other parties present 
appeared to hold an opposite view regarding 
the 
permissible(?) 
of 
a 
risk 
based 
remuneration 
structure 
or 
at 
least 
ideally 
wanted it to be used. 
10 
I said that this could actually be so but only 
with prior..., National Treasury approval....” 
 
Chair, it goes on, particularly on the opinion he 
says Mr Koko wanted to have but that is the version he has 
put up Mr Koko.  He seems to know you very well and the 
meeting that other people were present at. 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  Chair, I do not know this gentleman.  I 
had to Google his name ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   ...to check his face.  One.  Two, the procedure 
20 
that gave effect to the National Treasury, if I am not 
mistaken, I signed it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Say again? 
MR KOKO:   The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that document ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 106 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think I seem to because I think if it 
is the one that I am thinking about that we have discussed 
previously ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...I think has got your signature. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  So there is no ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is about the hiring of consultants 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at any costs. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think I seem to remember you 
signed it. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  So they – he did not need to bring this 
to my attention because I gave effect to that National 
Treasury policy.  The consulting work of Eskom was under 
my watch.  So I knew the constraints.  So.  But besides – 
besides it will be interesting if the Commission has done 
that, to get from Mr Thulango [00:14:23] who actually 
20 
instructed her.  Instructed him because it is him who did 
that, it is not me.    
CHAIRPERSON:   That is obtaining the opinion? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, it is not me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 107 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I wanted to ask you the question to the 
extent that Mr Laher says you wanted to obtain external 
legal 
opinion 
yourself 
on 
the 
matter. 
 
I 
think 
you 
interpreted that as meaning that he would not go through 
the normal channels but is that – does it have to be like 
that he is saying?  Could it not mean that you meant that 
you would approach whoever the right person is to obtain 
the opinion? 
MR KOKO:   Certainly, Chair.  I think you have got a point. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   You have got a – and you are a hundred 
percent correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   He may have meant, I will go on my own or I 
will follow the channels.  So let us give him the benefit and 
say I meant that I will follow the right channels to get 
...[indistinct] to get external opinion.  The fact is, I did not 
do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   It was not done by me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   That is a fact. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  Okay.  No, it is fine. 
MR KOKO:   The second part is.  Look at the date.  The 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 108 of 260 
 
date of the – okay – granting it is 2015.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   So you do not remember the dates well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But even that week, is the week that I left this 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had already left as you remember or 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   My last day was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in the process of leaving? 
10 
MR 
KOKO:   The 
board 
meeting was 
on the 21 s t 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of October? 
MR KOKO:   ...of October.  There was a board meeting and 
that was my last ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Board meeting. 
MR KOKO:   ...last board meeting and I was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that your last day on this job? 
MR KOKO:   It was my last day on this job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay.  Well, I guess, depending 
20 
when, as you say, if he gets the date wrong by a few days 
it might not make much difference. 
MR KOKO:   No, it will not make a difference, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   But all I am saying to you is.  I have never in 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 109 of 260 
 
my duration – Mr Seleka says he knows me well.  He does 
not.  I do not know this gentleman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   I do not know this gentleman.  I never 
interacted with this gentleman.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I never interacted with this gentleman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he says he was involved.  He was 
in an office called Compliance Office or something like 
that. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Senior Manager. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Heading up the Group Compliance 
Office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not deal regularly, from time to 
time, with the MEC(?) ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not? 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no.  I never – it looks senior(?) but it 
is not senior.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   It looks senior.  It is not senior. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   So my direct contact would be the Corporate 
Counsel. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 110 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   But it would be very disrespectful for me to go 
and talk to a Senior Manager, Corporate Compliance.  To 
be undermining my colleagues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   So, ordinarily, if I have a department from 
legal, I would pick up the phone or walk to mister – to the 
Corporate Counsel and say this is what I want. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And typically the Corporate Counsel is an 
advocate.  Very senior lawyer.  He will not deal with me.  
He will seek to advise me first.  You know, this is – 
Mr Koko, this is my first step at what you want to achieve.  
That is how it will typically work but I will not go to the 
level of a Senior Manager and talk to this gentleman.  I will 
not do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Of course, he gives a lot of detail 
here.  You – in regard to the meeting, you say you do not 
20 
remember having this meeting but in regard to knowing 
him, you seem to be quite clear that you did not know him. 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But with regard to the meeting, the way 
you put it seems to say:  Look, I cannot remember it but I 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 111 of 260 
 
cannot completely exclude the possibility that maybe the 
meeting did happen but with regard to him I am clear that I 
do not ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Certainly.  The names that are mentioned 
here, they were very important to my work with the 
exception of Mr Sagar.  Mr Sagar came in very late at 
Eskom.  In fact, I met him on a few occasions but other 
names I – you know, for lack of a better word, I would call 
them my – they were my brain(?) trust.  If you understand? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
If 
I 
wanted 
to 
place 
on 
a 
complex 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Issue. 
MR KOKO:   ...issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I will ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Contact. 
MR KOKO:   These people would typically be the people 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   ...that I would interact with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   So I – that is why I cannot say I never had 
such a meeting with these people because in a week with 
the exception of Mr Sagar, these people I would meet 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 112 of 260 
 
three, four times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Mr Koko, I seem to recall 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We have gone beyond one o’clock. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is ten past. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will hold my peace, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will hold my peace. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay quickly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you will hold it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I will hold it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay let us take the lunch 
break.  We will resume at ten past two.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, before Mr Seleka starts I just want to 
say that I – it is not my nature, I am in no way undermining 
Mr Seleka.  I may come across that way, I am apologising.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 113 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay. 
MR KOKO:   There are certain topics I just feel very 
passionate about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   It is not in my nature to... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I did not intend to come across that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, I also made reference to the 
documents that counsel has that I would like you to have. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I am not sure how we are going to forward 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me leave it to your counsel, he will 
know the right time he would like – one way, of course, is 
that they can be given to the legal team who must see 
where they need to be slotted at and obviously at the right 
time you will wish to refer to them and by then they must 
be in some bundle. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Chair, if I may, I am not sure exactly 
what the document is that Mr Koko is referring to.  I 
suspect it has something to do with the payments that were 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 114 of 260 
 
made to Trillian, but I am not sure. 
MR KOKO:   Okay, Chair, I referred to them, I will take my 
counsel through them, it is the minutes of the board, 22 
July 2015 and the minutes of the BTC of 26 February 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May we just finalise on this issue, Mr 
10 
Koko, because, Chair, I know we are at Eskom bundle 
14(c) but I would like to just quickly refer to 14(d) just to 
emphasise the point.  This is an application, 14(d), it is an 
application by Eskom against Trillian and McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Will somebody just check …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just help Mr Koko.  14(d) page 1161.  
Is it 14(d)?   
MR KOKO:  Got it, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Only a simple point.  Chair, this is an 
affidavit in an application by Eskom against McKinsey and 
20 
Trillian, this is when Eskom was reviewing the decision for 
those payments made of nearly R1.6 billion to McKinsey 
and Trillian.  Mr Phakamani Hadebe deposed to the 
affidavit on behalf of Eskom and he was the Acting Group 
Chief Executive for the applicant, which is Eskom.  All I am 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 115 of 260 
 
drawing your attention to is the paragraph on page 1195.  
Chair, you will recall we read portions of this affidavit 
during Mr Singh’s testimony.  This paragraph 8.2 on page 
1195, there too he refers to a meeting and I will read this 
paragraph.  Says: 
:On 2 September 2015 Mr Aziz Laher, Eskom Group 
Compliance Manager and PFMA corporate specialist 
addressed an email to a number of Eskom officials 
including, amongst others, Mr Martin Weiss, Prish 
Govender, Mia Obama, Charles Kalima and various 
10 
parties from Legal and Compliance and Professional 
Services.  In that email Mr Laher specifically 
recommended that Eskom would need to apply to 
the National Treasury for approval of the deviation 
from the National Treasury instructions.” 
This email appears – they refer to the attachment or rather 
the item number in the record bundle, as they call it.  And 
then paragraph 81 says – well, 80.3 says: 
“Mr Laher raised this issue yet again in an email 
dated 14 September 2015 appearing at item 50.” 
20 
Paragraph 81 says: 
“On or about 27 October 2015 Mr Laher was called 
to a meeting in Mr Koko’s office.  The meeting was 
attended by Mr Edwin Mabelane, Eskom’s Chief 
Procurement Officer of Eskom, Mr Prish Govender, 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 116 of 260 
 
Eskom’s then Project Director of Group Capital and 
two representatives from McKinsey, Mr Vikas Sagar 
and Dr Alex Weiss.” 
Essentially then, Chair, the subsequent paragraphs repeat 
in essence what Mr Laher said in his affidavit.  So that 
aspect, Mr Koko, I just wanted to your attention that it was 
also captured in this affidavit of Mr Phakamani. 
MR KOKO:   Certainly and I am aware of it, Chair, and the 
point I am making is that with the exception of Mr Sagar 
who was not an Eskom person, he came from Transnet, but 
10 
I do not know him from a bar of soap.  Dr Weiss was based 
at Megawatt Park.  Mr Mabelane was my colleague.  So the 
people that are mentioned, I use the word [indistinct], so I 
would meet with them and I – that is why I cannot say I 
have not – this meeting may or did not happen, I cannot 
rule that out.  But what I can say to you – what I can say to 
you with certainty is that in that meeting, if ever it 
happened, Mr Laher would not have been there, one. 
 
Two, is that the instructions to bring external legal 
advices did not …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   External legal opinion. 
MR KOKO:   Legal opinion, did not come from me and Mr 
Thulani [indistinct] who was a corporate counsel at the 
time did not get an instruction from me.  In the contrary, Mr 
Mabelane in his affidavit goes into a great length about 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 117 of 260 
 
how external …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Opinion was …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Opinion was acquired.  And in any event, 
when it was eventually acquired, I never had sight of it 
until this news came about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, Mr Seleka, the other people 
that are said to have been present at this meeting that are 
said by Mr Laher as having been present, what have they 
said if they have been asked to say anything about this 
meeting that Mr Laher talks about? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I do not personally know that they 
have been asked, Chair.  I will ask the investigators 
whether they have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because it is just a question of taking 
Mr Laher ’s affidavit and sending a request to them. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We draw attention to these paragraphs 
about this meeting that is alleged to have taken place 
where you are said to have been present by Mr Laher, 
please indicate what you have to say about one, whether 
20 
you were you present [indistinct – dropping voice], what 
the content of the discussion was. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And including whether Mr Koko said 
what Mr Laher says he said. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 118 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will, Chair.  Chair, then – ja, we can 
put this aside, Mr Koko.  Can we go back …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I guess what Mr Hadebe says 
here does not add anything in substance about that 
meeting because he was not part of the meeting, he is just 
repeating what Mr Laher said. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, correct.  I know that McKinsey  did 
not oppose this application but Trillian did. 
MR KOKO:   McKinsey did not oppose, that is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but Trillian did. 
MR KOKO:   Trillian did.  But it is of interest, Mr Chair, 
that the latest affidavit of Dr Weiss, which came in 
yesterday, clearly says that - who was the lead negotiator, 
clearly says what my role was in the negotiations and he 
clearly 
says 
between 
July 
and 
October 
when 
the 
negotiations happened, I was not involved.  It does say 
20 
that they met – they gave executives at Eskom feedback, 
which I confirm. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but it should be emphasised – 
Chair, I have a copy of that affidavit.  It came too late to 
form part of the bundle. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 119 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, I do not need to see it now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unless you propose to use it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you propose to use it, yes, I can have 
it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if you do not propose to use it, I can 
see it in the normal course.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, I thought, Mr Koko, it should 
10 
be emphasised that the executives who were informed, 
which he says were informed, is actually – he specifically 
mentioned yourself, so that it is not executives unnamed. 
MR KOKO:   No, he does mention Mr Molefe as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who were informed of what? 
MR KOKO:   Of the negotiations.  Let me hand it up, Chair, 
so we can just quickly read through the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because Mr Koko’s point about this 
affidavit is that it confirms that he did not take part in the 
negotiations.   Is that your understanding of what it says? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, what the affidavit says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is the point he makes about it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, he says: 
“I do not recall…” 
In regard to Mr Koko. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 120 of 260 
 
“Mr 
Koko 
was 
not 
a 
member 
of 
the 
Eskom 
negotiating team.  I do not recall him participating 
in any of the approximately 30 full day negotiating 
sessions McKinsey held with Eskom during that 
period.” 
He does say in paragraph 7: 
“McKinsey 
began 
discussing 
the 
proposed 
Top 
Engineers programme with Mr Koko in his capacity 
as Group Executive for Technology and Commercial 
and kept him apprised of this and related initiatives 
10 
during his suspension with the expectation that he 
would promptly return to this former position and be 
involved in executive these projects.” 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Paragraph 8, Chair, he says… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, paragraph 8, 7 I read first says. 
MR KOKO:   Paragraph 7,says: 
“I 
had 
lead 
negotiations 
of 
the 
turnaround 
programme which lasted from approximately July 
20 
2015 to November 2015.  Mr Koko was not a 
member of the Eskom negotiating team.  I do not 
recall him participating in any of the approximately 
30 full days…” 
Oh yes, that is what you read. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 121 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, that is what I read. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, I am not sure if I need to see 
it now, otherwise it can be slotted where it should be 
slotted in the bundles. 
MR KOKO:   But my point, Chair, and this is  - and I 
apologise again, Mr Seleka, is that here is a leader 
negotiator of McKinsey saying we met on these dates and 
this date to do the negotiations and Mr Koko was not part 
of it.  And then you have Ms Mothepu’s emails that says Mr 
10 
Koko and Mr Singh were the lead negotiators for Eskom 
and they have changed things around and added and 
subtracted things.  I think it is what it is, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, if it is important.  The only 
reason I was saying I am not sure that I should be – it 
should be given to me now is simply because it is clear 
what you say it says and Mr Seleka confirms that in effect 
that seems to be what it says on the point.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the only thing really is to the extent 
20 
that whether Mr Koko was part of the negotiations or not is 
important.  Other people who are said to have been part of 
it, their affidavits can be obtained and they can indicate 
what their recollection is. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
Chair. 
 
Obviously 
three 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 122 of 260 
 
paragraphs are in important there, 7, 8 and 9 and Chair 
will look at those paragraphs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About the issue that Mr Koko raises or 
what? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but you agreed with him that it says 
what he says it says. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but it is preceded by paragraph 7, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do they qualify what he says? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which 7 says that the discussion 
began with Mr Koko in regard to the Top Engineers 
programme and they kept him apprised of this and related 
initiatives during his suspension which is… 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that Mr Koko’s point is here is a 
witness who says I was not part of the negotiations.  So I 
am saying to the extent that it is an important issue 
whether or not he was part of the negotiations, those who 
were part of the negotiations could be asked to say – 
because you have Ms Mothepu who says he was and you 
20 
have Dr Weiss who says he was not so it becomes 
important to find out what other people say who have been 
at those meetings. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I think Mr Seleka is raising another 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 123 of 260 
 
topic on 7 that I must address, if I think I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  So all I am simply saying is, 
let us deal with one issue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Put it out of the way, if there is another 
one you can deal with it but let us not mix them 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us not mix them, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   End of being confused.  So I think it is – 
as far as the question of Mr Koko being part of the 
10 
negotiations, we are clear about what Dr Weiss says, we 
know what Ms Mothepu says, it is a question of what other 
people who attended those meetings have to say.  But then 
what is the other point? 
MR KOKO:   But, Chair, there is a documentary evidence 
that you must also consider, is that the people who were 
part of the negotiations compiled feedback to the board 
that we looked at the last time I was here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   On the 6 October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   That feedback …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I remember that document. 
MR KOKO:   That feedback told you who the board 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 124 of 260 
 
approved as a negotiator. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And it also told you who actually took part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually took part.  Yes, no, I remember 
that. 
MR KOKO:   We are duty-bound by – at Eskom or 
[indistinct] bound. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   When the board approves a negotiating team 
and different people participate, we have to inform the 
10 
board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   So that the board can condone litigation(?) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I think what obviously this means is 
these things should be put to Ms Mothepu. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say here is what Dr Weiss says, here 
is that other document that Mr Koko is referring to. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you not mistaken about this and then 
20 
take it from there and what is the response. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Shall we go back to Eskom 
bundle 14(c) if it is still in front of you, that affidavit of Mr 
Laher and I want to finish off properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 125 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 702.265. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, I am there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, paragraph 10.30.10, he says: 
“I said that this actually be so but only with prior 
National Treasury approval.” 
10.31: 
“I immediately after I was excused from the meeting 
I looked for my boss Mr [indistinct] to inform him 
what had transpired.  He was not immediately 
available but I saw him later the same day and I 
10 
explained what happened I also expressed my 
discomfort with the general tone of the meeting.  It 
appeared to me that management was still strongly 
intent 
on 
pursuing 
a 
risk-based 
remuneration 
structure for the contract.  I also informed him of Mr 
Koko’s intention to obtain external legal opinion 
himself which in itself was unusual as the role of a 
line executive was to request such a service from 
the head of legal who was the party that would 
evaluate the request and if it had merit, approve it 
20 
and make the appointment.” 
I think that paragraph, Mr Koko, makes it – it makes the 
distinction clear which the Chairperson was asking earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So think that is right and I think it 
probably provides an explanation why you took what Mr 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 126 of 260 
 
Laher said as meaning that you would not go through the 
normal channels of getting external legal opinion.   
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So this explains that what he was talking 
about is his understanding was that you were going to go 
outside yourself to get external legal and you would not go 
through the channels.  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And it would be, for a person at my position, 
10 
that would have been grossly irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja, ja, he also says it would be 
unusual. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Then – okay, I am leaving that part, 
Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja 
and 
maybe 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
completeness has it ever happened? 
20 
MR KOKO:   Has it ever happened that…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You obtained external legal opinion 
directly, therefore without going through legal? 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no.  No, Chairman, I mean I am old 
enough in Eskom to know what not to do to get my nose 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 127 of 260 
 
bloodied.  This is one of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And to your knowledge is it 
something 
that 
it 
would 
happen 
from 
time 
to 
time 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That other people – not you, other 
people would do that? 
MR KOKO:   No, one of the most powerful positions at 
Eskom is legal and compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:   And it sits directly at Exco, so… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot just… 
MR KOKO:   No, you cannot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR KOKO:   Besides that – besides the fact that engineers 
are bad lawyers.  No, we do not do it, Chair.  It is never 
ever done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, thank you, Chair.  He does to into 
the paragraphs where he shows that it was ultimately the 
20 
legal department or division of Eskom that sought legal 
opinion from a senior counsel. 
MR KOKO:   Very long time ago, Chair, I remember a very 
big dispute that ended up in court because lawyers were 
instructed by a division to do work and they did the work 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 128 of 260 
 
but they were never paid and they even lost at court and it 
is a very popular case still in Eskom.  You instruct the guys 
directly, you will pay them out of your own pocket. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Koko, I want to refer to 
your testimony on the 29 March 2021.  Before I finish off 
on the Master Services agreement, I have printed out the 
relevant pages and I would like you to be given that and 
your legal representatives to be given a page and the 
Chairperson to be given a page, a copy.  That is the 
transcript or an extract from the transcript of 29 March 
10 
2021 and specifically from pages 19 and 20 of that 
transcript. 
MR KOKO:   I remember that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you, Mr Koko.  At the 
bottom of the page on page 19, Chairperson, you were 
asked: 
“In relation to McKinsey?” 
And Mr Koko says: 
“In relation to McKinsey we called it Top Engineers 
programme. 
 
That 
decision 
was 
not 
only 
20 
inconsistent with National Treasury’s practice note, 
but was also against the Eskom …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, where are you reading from 
now? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 19,.at the bottom of the page of 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 129 of 260 
 
the transcript, the extract from the transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am expecting you to tell me 
numbers at the top. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is why I am looking at the top.  
Oh, the page number is at the bottom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is at the bottom, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I started with – against the 
Chairperson’s name: 
10 
“In relation to McKinsey…” 
CHAIRPERSON:   What line because you have got the 
marginal lines numbers there, 10, 20. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is after 20, it is the second line from 
the bottom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  It says: 
“Chairperson:  In relation to McKinsey.” 
At the bottom of the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And then Mr Koko then starts 
talking: 
“In relation to McKinsey we called it Top Engineers 
programme. 
 
That 
decision 
was 
not 
only 
inconsistent with the National Treasury’s practice 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 130 of 260 
 
note but was also against the Eskom directive.: 
“So his directive…” 
The Chairperson:  This directive.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   That must be this directive.  You know 
how they sometimes get this thing wrong when they 
transcribe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me go to the next big paragraph 
where Mr Koko is talking.  He says: 
10 
 
“So ordinarily, if properly advised, the board would  
 
set…” 
Or would sit, I suppose. 
“…go and sort this matter first with the National 
Treasury before you come to us.  The board would 
not say we give you a mandate to negotiate without 
having assurance that indeed National Treasury will 
indulge and that is the discussion that I had with 
the Chairman.” 
Now I stop there, Mr Koko, this is specifically in regard to 
20 
the SLA. 
MR KOKO:   This is the SLA, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The SLA, yes.  The Master Service 
agreement.  So with that in mind, Mr Koko, that is – and I 
am 
finalising 
on 
this, 
we 
need 
to 
explain 
to 
the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 131 of 260 
 
Chairperson because what we see from that feedback 
report – well, I could firstly refer to an email to you from 
Mr Prish Govender which I need to get now.  But he talks 
about – Chair, I am going to give you the page reference 
but let me just build this picture.  It is an email of 2 
September 2015, he sends you an update of a feedback. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, I remember it very well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You remember. 
MR KOKO:   I remember very well and the issues that 
needs to be resolved.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct. 
MR KOKO:   And one of them was National Treasury. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   National Treasury, that is correct. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One of the issues was exactly National 
Treasury and then you will have the feedback report, which 
you mentioned earlier of October 2015 which talks about 
the BTC having given a mandate to negotiate and now you 
are giving feedback in that report that you have negotiated 
and now you want to go ahead, I think to conclude the 
20 
agreement. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   With McKinsey.  But even at that 
stage, National Treasury approval …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Was not done. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 132 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Had not been obtained. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And matters do not end there, there is 
that 
conclusion 
of 
the 
agreement 
with 
a 
letter 
of 
acceptance. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, let me say there is an offer and 
acceptance, not the conclusion and then there is the 
steering committee meetings. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In 2016.  And you were part of the 
steering committee meetings. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now having said what you said to the 
Chairperson in that transcript that if properly advised, the 
board should have said do not even go to negotiate, try to 
get Treasury approval first before you embark on this 
exercise.  How do you explain then how did you and your 
colleagues go about the negotiations forming the steering 
committee, you writing an offer acceptance letter when you 
20 
knew there was no …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   “There was no…” what do you mean? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That there was no Treasury approval. 
MR KOKO:   When Mr Seleka says “you” who is “you”? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You, Mr Koko.  Let me say you, Mr 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 133 of 260 
 
Koko. 
MR KOKO:   Ja I …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us leave the other people aside 
because they are not here. 
MR KOKO:   Mr Seleka will have to advise you, when we 
did the design to cost, and my counsel told – gave me a bit 
of a lecture about how to answer you, so I am struggling 
now, so when we did the design to cost strategy and it – 
that design to cost strategy happened after the email Mr 
Seleka is talking about of the 2 n d of September. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, let me give the page reference 
Chair at this juncture, just for the record, or even for the 
Chairperson, the same Eskom Bundle 14C, page 811.170. 
MR KOKO:   That is the email, that is the ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Krish Govender ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I do not need to go there, I know it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   So that went to that Krish’s email of the 22 n d 
of September, which made it very clear that the National 
Treasury's approval is not in place.  That is one of the 
20 
reasons that – if not the main reason why I did not - why I 
had a separate contract for the Corporate Plan, with a 
fixed rate that is fully compliant with National Treasury 
requirement.  
So the letter that I wrote on the 29 t h of September, 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 134 of 260 
 
was fully compliant with National Treasury.  Chairman, let 
me tell you what - give me my experience, which I have not 
shared with you I would never play with National Treasury 
they would blow me.  
So, and that is why the design to cost of the 29 that 
came after the 2 n d there – the document that you have in 
front of you of the 2 n d of September, first went to my email 
of the 31 s t of August to Krish, Mr Singh and Mr Mabalane 
about 
colleagues, 
what 
is 
the 
progress 
on 
these 
negotiations for the MSA?  Because on the 22 n d of July the 
10 
Board has given us a go ahead to contract for the 
Corporate Plan.   
So that is why I asked for an update from them 
because I thought if they come back to me and say, in 
engineering, we say it's all systems go, the engineers will 
know what that means.  If it's all systems go, I will say sign 
let us do what the Board ask us to do.  
But I could not say sign let us do what the Board 
wants, because there was a serious condition that was not 
met.  So that is the only thing that I have signed.  The next 
20 
letter that was signed, it was signed an offer letter, was 
signed on the 17 t h of December 2015 by Mr Mabalane, you 
have read it and when you read it, it is encrypted.  I cannot 
just make sense of it.  Now, you did not make sense of it 
now.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 135 of 260 
 
That is the letter that Mr Mabalane signed, I was 
not party to that letter, I had nothing to do with it and that 
is why I asked when you say sign the letter, on what basis 
did you do that?  The evidence here was that the contract 
was concluded on the 7 t h of January and there is enough 
evidence to suggest that that was not the case.  It was 
back dated; I am actually buying into that story of 
backdating. Anybody who says it was not backdated is not 
clued up on that, the evidence speaks for itself.  
But even then, the only thing that the team and that 
10 
is Mr Dave Godi and Mr Krish Govender refers to - or the 
only alleged authority if I can use that is an email between 
Mr Gory and National Treasury that they used to say we 
have approval from National Treasury.  They used that 
email.  
Now, it is up to you to read that email and make up 
your mind whether it gives permission or not but what 
eventually transpired Chair, with that email notwithstanding 
there was a general understanding even within the team 
that actually we do not have.  We do not have National 
20 
Treasury's approval, that email that we standing and 
people may not be frank enough and this is what I am 
saying it depends who you talk to get to the truth.  
But once the penny drop that we actually do not 
have National Treasury approval people look for reasons 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 136 of 260 
 
why it should not go ahead. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, you are saying there 
were certain people who were very determined that it 
should go ahead even without National approval. 
MR KOKO:   No, no that is not what I am saying Chair, I 
am saying there was a point where – especially in the first 
meeting, Mr Seleka of the Steering Committee, when we 
were briefed, we have got National Treasury’s approval, 
and the documentation is in place and we accepted that 
but soon after that they - there was a clear…[intervene] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Understanding that there was no such 
approval. 
MR KOKO:   That there was no such approval and I think 
having that regard of Mr Laher interaction now, I think that 
push came from bigger, that actually your reliance on the 
email, does not cut it because the requirement to give a 
concession from National Treasury is actually onerous.  
It even requires the Presidency to do that, so you 
actually do not have it and there was an understanding 
within the Steering Committee that actually we do not have 
20 
and we are in serious breach of National Treasury and at 
that point I am saying everybody looked for every single 
reason we can use, that can be used to terminate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you saying the opposite of what I put 
to you earlier. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 137 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja. 
MR KOKO:   So I am saying…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the basis that there should have 
been an approval.  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no approval. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us terminate.  
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR KOKO:   But, you know, when I listened to some of my 
colleagues speak, I do not think they have the guts to say 
actually, there was no approval here and we made a 
mistake there.  I do not think that will is there but I am 
telling you, what was in my mind at that point.  
 
That February, March the writing was on the wall, 
we need to come out of this, we do not have the necessary 
approval, we have to come out of this. Of course, other 
opportunities may have presented themselves but the real 
20 
issue is - other issues could be managed, Chair. Other 
issues were within our control.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But the National Treasury is one, Eskom 
executives will tell you if it's in the hands of National 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 138 of 260 
 
Treasury then you in the…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have to comply. 
MR KOKO:   You have to comply.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Okay, so by 
February, March, the writing was on the wall that we need 
to get out of this and I want to talk about the payments that 
take you ultimately to the last payments because you 
wanted to tell the Chairperson about it.  Ultimately, various 
amounts are paid to McKinsey and Trillian the total of 
10 
which is R1.593billion.  
MR KOKO:   We normally round it off to 1.6. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   To 1.6. 
MR KOKO:   And we say the 600 went to…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   It is actually 599, that is as well 600. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Koko and Mr Seleka the two of 
you seem to be talking to each other, particularly you Mr 
Koko you are talking so softly I think I only want Mr Seleka 
to hear what you saying.  
20 
MR KOKO:   The total amount that was paid to McKinsey, 
and Trillian is 1.6 and…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   1.6billion…[intervene] 
MR KOKO:   Billion rand, yes and a billion rand of that 
went to McKinsey and R600million of that went to Trillian.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 139 of 260 
 
Chair it’s a round off fee but the numbers are very close. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No that is correct.  Then Mr Koko let 
me give you the opportunity then to tell the Chairperson 
about the last payment of R460million.  But this is the 
question I am going to ask you so that you address the 
Chairperson, because that payment is made on the 22 n d of 
February 2017 and it came to the BTC for approval.  
MR KOKO:   Yes, on the 8 t h of February.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, and at that stage, you were the 
10 
Acting Group Chief Executive Officer.  
MR KOKO:   That is correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now I am going to ask you, not the 
question you are expecting because the question you are 
expecting is the memorandum Suzanne Daniels where 
Krish Govender and Mr Mabalane, which you refuse to 
sign. 
My question is more on in your capacity as the 
acting Group CEO why did you not take a further step, 
which is not just to refuse to sign the memo but to refuse 
20 
them to make the payment in the light of the writing is on 
the wall, we should have gotten out of this contract.  
MR KOKO:   Chair, this is quite important.  Eskom has got 
a delegation of authority and everybody in Eskom acts 
within the delegations of authority.  It is quite important but 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 140 of 260 
 
I want to - I am going to quickly take you through, I am 
going to give you days, and you may not write them down, 
but the transcript will show you and they will tell you what 
has transpired.  
 
And I think the gossipers, and the people that are 
on the Koko hunt missed it, including your colleagues at 
the Pretoria High Court, which is one of the painful things 
for me, because they have concluded there was a corrupt 
relationship and I am saying to you, if they had regards to 
the evidence that you now have, they would have reached 
10 
a different conclusion.  
So, the most important date is the 6 t h of July 2015. 
The 6 t h of July 2015 is the date that the BTC approved via 
a round robin, the MSA, the negotiations with the MSA.  
The next important date is a feedback of the 6 t h of October 
2015. That's when we gave the Board the feedback and 
that is when the Board ratified the deviations from the 
mandate to the actual result of the negotiations and in that 
feedback you will see that the requirement for compliance 
with National Treasury. 
20 
That report I signed, I had no other option to sign it 
was in my role to sign it, it tells you who negotiated it, it 
tells who was approved to negotiate, and who participated 
in the negotiations, and it gives you the scope and it puts 
the cap for risk base to 11.98%, it says 12% where I hear a 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 141 of 260 
 
rumour that says we did – the price was not even the cap, 
the cap is also in that BTC submission of 6 t h October 2015.  
Then comes the meeting of June, 21 June 2016. 
That is the meeting of the BTC that resolved to cancel the 
MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that in line with the realisation you 
talked about in March, February, March? 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chairman there is other reasons that I 
added there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that is fine. 
MR KOKO:   There is other reasons but I can tell you now 
knowing what I know, other issues Eskom could have 
resolved.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But this one they could not resolve and the 21 
June 2016, a submission was made to the Board and 
unbeknown to me, and I had no reason to do the target, 
nor sign the document.   
I am mentioning this Chair so that you can base 
20 
your judgment at the end on evidence and you go look at 
the document of the 21 June 2016, you will find the team 
that put it together you will not find my name there, I am 
not one of them.  
The next one…[intervene] 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 142 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, do you happen to know 
where that document is to be found in the bundle maybe 
your junior could check and then they could put that on 
record.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   BTC minutes. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, the meeting the submission to the BTC of 
21 June 2016 where it was recommended to the Board to 
cancel the MSA.  You have it nicely set up in your bundle, I 
think it is Bundle 18 they come in quite nicely.  It is one of 
the nice altogether documents it helped me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well the – this team, well I say this 
team – the legal team and the investigation team and the 
Secretariat who put these documents together seem to 
have impressed quite a few witnesses, including the 
witnesses who appeared last week. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I must tell you when I got it, it was easy 
for me to follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no that is fine.  So your junior 
could look it up and then he could just mention on record 
in which bundle, on which page it appears so that when 
20 
one goes through the transcript one can come across that 
and go to the bundle, yes, continue, Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   The next Board submission is that submission 
of the 8 t h of August 2016 and that was to give the Board 
feedback that you said we must cancel and we must go and 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 143 of 260 
 
renegotiate, and they came back to the Board and says we 
have 
renegotiated 
and 
the 
settlement 
amount 
is 
R1.8billion.  
Again, that submission had nothing to do with me, 
well I was not part of it, it is not that I did not have nothing 
to do with it.  If I was made part of it, I would 
have…[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not take part.  
MR KOKO:   I did not take part of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Formulating it, ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:   I did not take part of it unfortunately, I did not 
even know about it.  If I was consulted on it, I would have 
probably taking part of it, and I would probably advised but 
I did not – it ended up at the Board Tender Committee.  
The 
Board Tender 
Committee 
did 
say 
in 
that 
meeting Mr Koko, they mentioned my name, my position, it 
must form part of the people to renegotiate further the 
R1.8billion. 
On the 13 t h of December the team came back 
again…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is 2016. 
MR KOKO:   2016, again between the 8 t h of August and 
13 t h of December I never participated and I never took part 
in it, the Board came back to – or the team came back to 
the meeting and gave them feedback and requested a 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 144 of 260 
 
payment, a further payment of R130million and something. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   R134million. 
MR KOKO:   R134million, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that December? 
MR KOKO:   That is December, 13 December 2016.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right.  
MR KOKO:   Again I was not party to it and the way it 
works Chair once the Board delegates, you, you may not 
even be in the meeting, you have to be prompted by the 
Secretariat that in your absence, the Board delegated this 
10 
to you. Otherwise, you will never know and I did not end 
the team leader.  
 
The project manager must set up meetings, get 
involved, and then you apply your mind, that never 
happened.  
Then come the next meeting of 17 - of 8 February 
2017.  There was not even a submission there, Mr Krish 
Govender and Ms Suzanne Daniels went to present the 
final settlement of R460million.  There was not even a 
submission there, I sent Mr Saleka - my counsel, I gave the 
20 
recordings of that meeting to my attorney to send them to 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the BTC meeting? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, it was the BTC meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 145 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you say you have got the audios? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I made sure that my attorney sent them 
to Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I believe it was being sent yesterday 
Chair. 
MR KOKO:   No, no it is very old stuff.  The yesterday's 
one was different. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh but it is - well, I do not know that, 
10 
which one was being sent because I have not - I have not 
had a chance to look. 
MR KOKO:   The audio of the meeting of the 8 t h of 
February 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Apart from the audio is there a transcript 
of the audio?  
MR KOKO:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no transcript of the audio.  
MR KOKO:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, if the contents are important of 
20 
the audio I would like them to be transcribed, so that one 
can have the audio but also one can have the transcript.  
MR KOKO:   Chairman it is very important that - I actually 
tried to get them transcribed but we did not do a good job 
in transcribing them and then I gave up, I got the transcript 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 146 of 260 
 
but they are not for your level. [Laughing] I did not want to 
upset you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so the legal team if that can be 
arranged so that there is a transcript.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know I want to avoid going to an 
audio unless there is a dispute about what is in the 
transcript, a transcript would be more convenient.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, no we will do that. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, the reason I went for the audio is again 
10 
people coming here to mislead you and it saddens me that 
when that happens unless I have a document or an audio 
to prove them wrong then I look the corrupt party.  So the -  
Eskom went to Court and said Mr Koko negotiated the 
conclusion of the settlement agreement. That is the Eskom 
version in Court on the basis of which the Judges made the 
conclusion that I have a corrupt relationship with Mr Salim 
Essa.   
But I have just taken you through a document that 
shows that I never took part into these negotiations, 
20 
including the conclusions of it and the affidavit of the lead 
negotiator of McKinsey says so but the important part is 
that the person making these allegations is actually the 
one who made the submissions, Ms Daniels. 
She is the one who says Mr Koko this, Mr Koko 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 147 of 260 
 
that, Mr Koko concluded that but that audio tells you 
exactly who negotiate - who presented to the BTC, it is 
none other than Ms Daniels and Mr Govender.  If I did not 
have that audio, I still be the – I will still look the bad one 
but in that meeting Ms Daniels does an interesting part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I wanted to say Mr Koko a few 
minutes ago, you said unless you have a document to just 
prove what other witnesses say you would look the corrupt 
one and I wanted to say, if I was nodding, I was not 
nodding that you look the corrupt one if you do not produce 
10 
a document.   
I was just acknowledging that I hear what you are 
saying.  
MR KOKO:   Oh. [laughing]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So I do not want anybody later on if 
there is a review saying, let us watch what the Chair – how 
– what the Chairman did, look he was nodding so he 
thought I was the corrupt one. [laughing]  
MR KOKO:   You agreed Chair but the important part Chair, 
in that audio…[intervene] 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So sorry, Mr Koko are you talking 
about the meeting of December now?  
MR KOKO:   No, no 8 February 2017.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, okay that is BTC meeting. 
MR KOKO:   That is BTC meeting. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 148 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, carry on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may continue. 
MR KOKO:   She says to the Commission; to the BTC the 
settlement agreement has been audited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has been audited? 
MR KOKO:   Yes, it is the outcome…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is that supposed to mean? 
MR KOKO:   It is an outcome of an audit process.  When 
we 
know 
at 
that 
time, 
the 
auditors 
were 
not 
even 
appointed, were not even on the job. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what would it mean ordinarily to say 
a settlement agreement is audited, was being audited? 
 
MR KOKO:   Well it means you had a third party 
independent person…[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Who has looked at it and satisfied. 
MR KOKO:   Who has looked at it and satisfied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not have to be an auditor. 
MR KOKO:   No, it does not have to be but it must be a – 
20 
in engineering we said it must be a competent person.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   If it is a legal matter the competent person 
must be a senior counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Must be a lawyer, ja. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 149 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   If it is an accounting matters, I apologies – if 
it is an accounting matter the competent person must have 
a relevant qualification, if it is an engineering matter the 
competent person must be a professionally registered 
engineer with so much experience. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is what she was - in the 
context of a settlement agreement that probably meant it 
had been looked at by, and the competent person? 
MR KOKO:   That would have been a legal person, the 
competent person would have been a legal person. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But that was forced Chair and in hindsight, a 
person making false representation and even denying that 
he was part of that meeting and only change his mind when 
he is confronted by the audios. I mean, she went to the 
Parliamentary inquiry and rubbish me, without telling them 
that I actually are the one who presented and motivated to 
the Board to get this R460million paid, 
Chair, there is a bigger problem and I said to 
counsel 
outside, 
if 
the 
Chair 
does 
not 
see 
these 
20 
documents, but this one he must see.  Mr Seleka I am 
coming to your answer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am glad you sensed that. 
MR KOKO:   Your answer is quite simple. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 150 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   The delegations of authority…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just face the Chairperson. 
MR KOKO:   The delegations of authority of Eskom 
deliberately 
excludes 
a 
CE 
from 
being 
involved 
in 
commercial process.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   It is by design.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so that is why you would not have 
given any instruction. 
MR KOKO:   That is why I could not.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   You will see that there is a Board Resolution, 
the Board is above the CE. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   There is a Board resolution so the matter has 
served 
at 
the 
Board, 
the 
Board 
has 
resolved. 
So 
now…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot, with such a higher level.  
MR KOKO:   Is at a high level and be suspended again for 
defying the Board, ja, and I do not want to go there but 
20 
Chair, the…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, as a Group CEO, acting 
Group CEO, you would be entitled, if you thought the 
Board was doing something wrong.  To say to them, but I 
know you have made this resolution but I just want to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 151 of 260 
 
check whether you are aware that you should not make it 
because of - you should not have made it because of A, B, 
C, D.  
Were you aware of these things?  If they say, we 
were aware they go ahead, there is nothing you can do but 
as Group CEO I do not think that you can allow the Board 
to do something that you know is wrong, and not raise a 
voice. 
MR KOKO:   Chair I have done that even when I was a 
junior. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  
MR KOKO:   When I received instructions from the Board 
then I think, the Board is not authorised to do and they 
have done that after that and I have done this specifically 
pertains to the case we are talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR KOKO:   I have done that and I would like my counsel 
Mr Barry, if you can give Chair the document of the – that 
memo of the 17 t h of October. 
ADV BARRY:   Chair, if I may, let me overlook what is 
20 
relevant here, the one contains copies of the Trillian 
invoices and the other is a covering note, to Mr Koko of a 
document that you will recognise. 
These 
documents 
emanated 
from 
and 
the 
disciplinary inquiry bundle relating to Ms Daniels. I’m 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 152 of 260 
 
talking about the letter document relating to Ms Daniels, 
disciplinary inquiry.  So there is actually two documents 
and just give in the one the important one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hang on to them, I want to receive 
them in the right way.  Now, if they are obviously 
important, if you are going to - maybe I should see them 
now if you are going to elaborate but if you will deal with 
them, maybe more fully at some stage in the future, then 
what should be done - I would like them to go into a proper 
file so that we can allocate them the exhibit number and 
10 
everything properly because if they just get handed up now 
it is just for seeing and not…[intervene] 
ADV BARRY:   Chair, it is our experience that if we hand 
documents up to you here that it actually does find their 
way into the bundles, but we will make sure that this 
document you make it available electronically and however, 
but it is important that if you see it now, but understand Mr 
Koko it was referenced in confidence. 
MR KOKO:    We can take it back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can have a look at it now there is no 
20 
problem but I just want to make sure that they find their 
way into a bundle that will be among the bundles that I will 
consider.  
ADV BARRY:   We will make very sure of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright then I can have 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 153 of 260 
 
a…[intervene] 
ADV BARRY:   There are four copies of each, so one for 
you and then for Mr Koko.  
MR KOKO:   Chairman, the document you have is one of 
the painful moments for me in this process. That you know, 
I tweet a lot and when I become very abrasive of people 
who have no personal knowledge of what I am dealing with 
and you -  one of the – you are – our – I look forward to 
sharing this document and then you will understand the pain 
I am going through. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one you are referring to in particular 
is it the settlement agreement or the other document?  There 
are two or are they part of the same? 
MR KOKO:  The one is the – the first one is the settlement 
agreement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Mr Koko you were referring the 
Chairperson to a memo of 17 October I do not know which 
year. 
MR KOKO:  2017. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  2017.  Can we deal with that first?  Is 
that fine? 
MR KOKO:  That is the one I am talking about. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the one? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 154 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.   
MR KOKO:  Chair you will see that this is a document it is 
has got a covering note to the Group Chief Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry are you talking about the memo 
that is just underneath the settlement agreement page? 
MR KOKO:  Yes, yes so it is the final settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is a memo from Mr Mabelane to 
you when you were interim Group Chief Executive. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which is dated 17 February 2017. 
10 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think Mr Seleka said 17 October if I 
am not mistaken.  So 17 February. 
MR KOKO:  17 February 2017. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no I – this – well. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Oh 
you 
were 
talking 
about 
another 
document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It should be corrected because I heard 
Mr Koko say October. 
MR KOKO:  I apologise it is 17 February. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  February ja. 
MR KOKO:  2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR KOKO:  Chair I received this memo from Ms Daniels 
contrary to her protestations and you will see what that my 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 155 of 260 
 
counsel says we have got – we got this fairly recently from 
your commission in bundle – from your team’s bundle but 
this document was part of the disciplinary hearing of Ms 
Daniels.  And you will see it is the – it says received by – 
you see the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On what page? 
MR KOKO:  On the very first page.  It has got handwritten. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not see received by – on the 
settlement page? 
MR KOKO:  Yes the first page it is written in the top right 
10 
corner C201. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I can see that. 
MR KOKO:  At the bottom – bottom right it says received by 
the Chief Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh received 23 February 2017 Chief 
Executive yes. 
MR KOKO:  So – so this document was received by my office 
on the 23rd of February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And you will see the notes I make – handwritten 
20 
notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  On the 25t h of February 2017.  In the – I make 
notes there who is delegated by the BTC to implement the 
MSA? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 156 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is your handwriting? 
MR KOKO:  That is my handwriting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  But now Chair if… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the signature that comes immediately 
before. 
MR KOKO:  That is mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your signature. 
MR KOKO:  That is mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is on 25 February 2017. 
10 
MR KOKO:  That is mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Continue. 
MR KOKO:  Now Chair I would not write this sentence if I 
was delegated and if I negotiated the – this settlement – I 
would not.  And then the bottom line I am sending – I am 
writing a note to my PA because now it go – when we 
going… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that Prish? 
MR KOKO:  No, no when I see the document it is my in-tray.  
If I go through my in-tray and nobody’s in the – so I just 
20 
make notes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  So now this note will be read  
CHAIRPERSON:  By your PA. 
MR KOKO:  By my Professional Assistant. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 157 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  So I am saying to Prish let us have a discussion 
on the 1s t of March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Oh you also wrote – that is your 
handwriting there. 
MR KOKO:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It say please Prish please let us discuss 
and then you got 1.3.217. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the when you want the discussion 
10 
to happen? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is your signature after discuss. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay 
alright 
and 
Prish 
– 
is 
Prish 
Govender? 
MR KOKO:  Prish Govender is a Project Manager. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR KOKO:  Chair if you go to the last sentence – last page 
of 203. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which would be the second page of the 
memo? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  You see the signatures are all there and they 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 158 of 260 
 
are not dated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  They are not dated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes they are not dated. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And yours is not there. 
MR KOKO:  And mine is not there.  But Chair what is 
important and Mr Seleka knows that the invoice – this 
payment was done on the 22 nd. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The day after you had – oh before you 
10 
received it? 
MR KOKO:  Before I received this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because you received this on the 23rd of 
February. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say the payment was made the day 
before. 
MR KOKO:  It was already done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  And let us look at what the team was asking me 
20 
to approve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  You – if you go to – to the recommendation 
C203 says: 
“To settle the outstanding amount payable to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 159 of 260 
 
McKinsey and BEE partner of R460 million to 
conclude the termination agreement.” 
So the team is asking me to give them approval to pay R460 
million – that was already paid and the same person who 
brought this to me goes to Parliament and come to this 
commission he says Mr Koko is the one who negotiated this 
settlement. Chair this is what I go through. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you say: 
1. You did not sign this. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Memorandum which – which had been 
compiled by – well it does not – it says supported by – it 
does not say who compiled it.  Is it – I thought that … 
MR KOKO:  Normally it will come and say compiled by. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They normally say who compiled – yes. 
MR KOKO:  But I can … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is unusual. 
MR KOKO:  This is unusual ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  Normally to – normally to say. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is like nobody wants to know that he or 
she is the one who compiled it. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. And this is another anomaly here.  Normally 
it will say compiled by. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Recommended. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 160 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  Recommended by. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then approved by. 
MR KOKO:  And approved by. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So this one says supported by. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Prish Govener.  Supported by Edwin 
Mabelane.  Supported by Suzanne Daniels.  Approved and 
then of course your signature is not there. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it does not say who compiled it.  But 
10 
on the first page of the memo it says it is from Mr Edwin 
Mabelane and … 
MR KOKO:  No it is from Prish Govender. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR KOKO:  The note says Prish Govender. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But the memo itself. 
MR KOKO:  Yes the memo says Mr Mabelane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am saying if you look at C202. 
MR KOKO:  Yes I agree – I agree with you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes it is a memo that is addressed to you 
and purports to come from Mr Edwin Mabelane. 
MR KOKO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 161 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so I guess it is odd that he should 
sign that he it was supported by him rather than it was from 
him. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I – I – ja okay. 
MR KOKO:  Now Chair now the – the invoice I have also 
attached – the next document is an invoice for this and you 
will – I have put all the McKinsey invoices but the one that is 
relevant – yes is the one dated 21s t February – the last one 
– the very last one.  R176million. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes now that is the other small bundle that 
– is an invoice from Trillian and it is addressed to Mr Edwin 
Mabelane at Eskom and it is dated 15 February 2017 and it 
is for professional services Management Consulting for the 
following Eskom initiatives procurement 00:09:43 energy 
phase, generation and it is R154 677 525,69 plus VAT then it 
comes to with VAT it comes to R176 332 379.29.  Ja you 
want to talk about this one? 
MR KOKO:  This one – This invoice was received on the 21s t 
and was paid on the 22 nd. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was received by Eskom on the 21s t? 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of February 2017 and was? 
MR KOKO:  Paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the 22n d? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 162 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  On the 22 nd. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You – you want to tell me where it 
was – where it shows – where is proof that it was paid on the 
22n d or is that not in this document? 
MR KOKO:  Yes Chair I do not have 00:10:57 but I  - it is on 
the Eskom court papers they say it the receipt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  Now Chair the point I am making to you and the 
invoice come on the 22 n d – 21s t get – take on the 22 n d on the 
23rd I receive an – I do not know what you call it – 00:11:22 
10 
that says give us permission to pay what has already been 
paid without being told that it is paid.  I arrange a meeting 
on the 1s t of March which never take place. Now Ms Daniels 
who is the contact person between – I never had contact with 
Mr Mabelane on this topic on this invoice.  I had contact with 
Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry you never had contact with whom? 
MR KOKO:  Mr Mabelane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About this? 
MR KOKO:  About the invoices I had contact with Mr 
20 
Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  I never had contact with Mr Govender. I had 
contact with Ms  
CHAIRPERSON:  Daniels. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 163 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  With Ms Daniels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  And she is the one who goes around and tells 
people how corrupt I was without telling the commission the 
machinisation[?] that has been happening here and that is 
the pain I go through Chair.  And that is why I am saying 
forget what Mabongane says, forget what OUTA says, forget 
what Open Secret says, forget what Mothepu says the 
documents 
are 
here 
in 
front 
of 
you 
they 
speak 
for 
themselves. 
10 
 
Finally Chair I want to take this – if you look at the 
document of the invoice you cannot read it I think it is small 
but I put it there by deliberate because when I talk about 
Managing Contract Insep – sep tells you who did what.  Sep 
is an audit trail for you.  Once you take this invoice you 
going to Sep and you will say oh this is the person who 
created the order, this is the person who did goods received, 
this is the person who released the payment.  And if you 
want to know how that invoice would be done – was done 
and you are not targeting a person by now you should have 
20 
the affidavits of the people who are on this invoice and I am 
not on this invoice.  So when the Judge when three full – 
when a full bench of the Pretoria High Court says when Mr 
Koko received invoices he paid them with alacrity.  I do not 
remember – I do not even know how to spell it there. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 164 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  It is not supported by facts.  It is not supported 
by evidence and Chair the only people who could have given 
the courts this evidence is Eskom.  They chose not to give 
Eskom – the court this evidence because they (inaudible).  
They are on the hunt to make the court think that Mr Koko is 
a bad, corrupt fellow and they put them – there Eskom had 
all these documents before them.  Mr Bakamane does not 
depose the Eskom affidavit. But apparently he never had 
personal knowledge of what he was disposing of so he did 
10 
not know what he was telling the courts.  But the people who 
briefed him had this all this – all these documents.  They 
could have said to the courts actually this is how these 
payments were made and the court would have reached a 
different conclusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well these documents you do have them 
Mr Seleka in the bundles? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes the memo is contained in Mr Koko’s 
bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  This memo dated just for the record 
dated 17 February 2017 is in Eskom Bundle 15 at page 363 
marked Annexure MMK35.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But it does not have the covering note. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 165 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It does not have the covering note? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes it does not have the covering note. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  And then the – the invoices  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you go to the invoices I may – 
I may be mistaken but I do not remember Ms Daniels being 
questioned on this memo was she? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No she was Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She was questioned? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did she explain why Mr Koko’s signature is 
not there? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But hers and the other people’s were 
there? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you remember what is 00:15:42. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes she said Mr Koko refused to sign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes that comes way back. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in fact that payment had taken place 
the day before was that – was that also put to her? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No as I say we did not have this covering 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 166 of 260 
 
note. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Oh you did not have this invoice – this 
– okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja because the memo is dated the 17t h of 
February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And she was also uncertain about when 
did she receive the memo.  We knew the date of payment at 
least from the investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But we did not know when did Mr Koko 
receive it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  So you say you did not have 
the invoices? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The covering note. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not have the covering note. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The covering note to the memorandum? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To the memorandum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then on the invoices you did not have 
the invoices or you did have them or you do not know yet? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  There is one invoice I know is in the 
bundles.  Oh my junior says all of them are in the bundle 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 167 of 260 
 
except for the first page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Of the – of the batch that Mr Koko has 
handed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  They are all in Eskom Bundle 14(c).  
Sorry Chair let me –  
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. I just wanted to check what 
you – you have. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Mr Koko going back to the covering 
note I see the – the last note you made that Prish please tell 
– please let us discuss.  Is the date there 1.3 – 1/3/17? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I am thinking about the issue of 
documents that Mr Koko brings up from time to time.  Maybe 
what should happen is that ahead of – of him giving evidence 
obviously from your side you would know what is to be 
20 
covered and he would know what is to be covered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of scope.  If he has any 
documents that he would like to be handed up maybe Mr 
Koko those could be sent to – to Mr Seleka in advance to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 168 of 260 
 
say you would like these documents to be part of the bundle 
and ahead of the hearing they can be put in a – in a file or 
they would be slotted in the right place but what would 
happen is as he questions you and you give your evidence at 
the right time reference can be made to the documents you 
want to refer to but they would only also already be in a 
bundle and they can be admitted there and then.  So then it 
is much more orderly. 
MR KOKO:  Understood Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Than if they are handed up.   
10 
MR KOKO:  I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us do it that way.  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  I apologise Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no problem.  Okay alright continue 
Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay I think you said yes to that date Mr 
– 1/3/17. 
MR KOKO:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Now that is 1 March 2017 can you recall 
the reason why at that stage you would have wanted to 
20 
speak to Mr Govender? 
MR KOKO:  First – my first question is there.  Who is 
delegated to deal with?  It is a very important part for me.  
Because the – in fact I – I knew then Chair what I was going 
to ask this person.  Why are you doing this?  Why? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 169 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because you are not delegated. 
MR KOKO:  The person who is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh who is delegated. 
MR KOKO:  Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  You – who is this BEE partner?  Remember the 
ques – and that was the most important part for me.  I knew 
who the BEE partner here is – they are referring to.  I – I had 
no doubt about… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on I think the two of you are – are 
10 
leaving me behind.  Where were you reading from just now 
Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh on the covering note Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the same documents. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes covering note but Mr Koko is more 
knowledgeable and he gets… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but what was your question to him? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  At the last note the handwritten note is 
Prish please let us discuss. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the date below that is 1//3/17. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Which is 1 March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So I asked Mr Koko the – whether that is 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 170 of 260 
 
correct he says yes and then my question was can he recall 
at that stage which is 1 March 2017 what is it that he wanted 
to discuss with Mr Govender.  And Mr Koko let me  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let me add to that because there is gap 
between your first note – the date of your first note which is 
25 February 2017 and 1 March 2017. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  If you could explain the gap? 
MR KOKO:  And that gap is probably driven by my diary and 
10 
it also tells you I had no urgency. This was not an… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So urgent. 
MR KOKO:  It was not an urgent matter for me. At Eskom we 
deal with urgent issues Chief decisions and life stops when it 
is urgent.  But the fact that I put these dates here it tell you 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja there was no urgency as far as you 
were concerned. 
MR KOKO:  There was no urgency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On this one. 
20 
MR KOKO:  On this one this thing can wait. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Ask Prish to come see me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja in a week’s time. 
MR KOKO:  On this date and I made this note there – the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 171 of 260 
 
first note Mr Seleka would have been my 00:22:37 just to 
remind me on that discussions I will have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the first one. 
MR KOKO:  Ja the first one would be my … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is delegated by the BTC to implement 
the MSA. 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  And when I get that person I am asking him this 
BEE person even though it is not written I know who he is 
10 
because he came to me first previously and I said no.  So 
how are you going to pay this person?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no I think it is the – that part that 
was confusing me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I thought maybe his reference to the 
paid to the BEE person or that you are talking about. 
MR KOKO:  No, no Chair if you – if you go to – if you go to – 
let us stick with the top right corner C203.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:  He say we are going to pay McKinsey and 
ordinarily it will stop there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So it is – so a final settlement – 
oh 
to 
settle 
– 
the 
recommendation 
is 
to 
settle 
the 
outstanding amount payable to McKinsey and the BEE 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 172 of 260 
 
partner.  Oh so what you are now raising is … 
MR KOKO:  Ordinarily. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Showing that. 
MR KOKO:  Ordinarily it will stop at McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  Because that is our contracting partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  That is the person who was settling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the payment must go to that – to 
McKinsey. 
10 
MR KOKO:  And the payment must go to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and if they are to pay a BEE partner 
that is their own business. 
MR KOKO:  They can pay that BEE partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  So here – but here it says to pay 
McKinsey and the BEE partner. 
MR KOKO:  Yes and that is a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
MR KOKO:  And that was the problem I saw there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you said at the meeting with Mr 
20 
Govender you were going to ask how the BEE partner was 
going to be paid? 
MR KOKO:  And why is he there in the first place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And why is he mentioned – why is he 
mentioned there? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 173 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. Okay. But you – you obviously 
have quite something to say about this. Why do you think the 
BEE partner is – or the reference to BEE partner is there? 
MR KOKO:  No Chair it – because it confronted me before 
but not only did it confront me before with Ms Goodson but I 
had met Mr Essa and Mr Sagar as well when we discussed 
the payment.  And the process of payment was an issue.  
And I made it clear to them all the time that we can only pay 
McKinsey on the work that was done and approved by 
10 
McKinsey.  McKinsey can employ whoever they want to 
employ but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no, no I think – I think I have just 
realised something.  You see both you and Mr Singh get 
questioned on some of the transactions are the same that 
you get questioned on I think and – and I seemed to think 
that something that I now realise must have been said by Mr 
Singh I thought you had also said the same thing because in 
regard to – to payment of .. 
MR KOKO:  No Chair I do not subscribe to payment of 
20 
Trillian being – I do not support that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is exactly what I want – what I am 
realising is that what you are clarifying now is that you do 
not go along with that. 
MR KOKO:  No, no. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 174 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes because Mr Singh was – you probably 
were watching when I was – when we were questioning him 
on that.  So for you the position was payment was to go to 
the main contractor that is McKinsey.  If they had a BEE 
partner as Eskom would have said they should have that is 
their business how they pay their BEE partner.  Eskom was 
not going to pay the BEE partner directly.  Is that right? 
MR KOKO:  Chairman that was my response on the 10t h of 
February 2016 when I had a meeting with Ms Goodson that 
is that interesting meeting that we had.  And it was my – it 
10 
was also my response in the workshop that happened 
immediately after that on the 10t h of – with 00:27:28 Mr 
Salim Essa and either Mr Mabelane or Mr Mabela who 
accompanied me to the thing. So it is – Chairman it is not 
something we can debate it Eskom’s rules are clear that – 
but I do not want to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually now I remember that Mr Singh 
testified that there were – there was a policy both at 
Transnet and at Eskom if I remember well which authorise 
the payment of BEE partners directly. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To sub-contractors yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja am I right that is what he said? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is what he said about Eskom Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and I said we should have that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja and that is – sorry. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 175 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have not got that or we are still waiting 
for it or we know that it is not going to come? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No that is what I indicated earlier Chair 
that we received it in the wee hours of this morning. It is a 
letter from an Eskom official. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It has got the policy? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is a letter from an Eskom official. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Who says we are asking her to do that in 
an affidavit that there is no such a policy. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That looked at version 2, 3 and 4 of the 
policy but the policy does not have a provision that 
authorises 
Eskom 
to 
make 
payment 
directly 
to 
sub-
contractors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  
MR KOKO:  But Chair I – it is your show but I would ask you 
not to waste your time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja Mr Koko said it is un-debated it is not 
a debateable issue. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no but there is a witness who has 
come here and said there is so it is important that we gather 
evidence which either supports what he says or refutes what 
he says. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 176 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so that is what I say.  I mean … 
MR KOKO:  Ja Chair I genuinely not – then I do not want to 
comment on other witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR KOKO:  To back Eskom so I will not but I just think that 
my former colleague was mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:  That is – I – that policy Chair should be in the 
document called 321024. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes to which he also referred I think. 
10 
MR KOKO:  Ja so it is not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  If it is not ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   If it is not there I think she was – I think he 
was mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I think he was mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well...  [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   That is the best – I think that is how far I can 
take it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
No, 
no 
I 
realise 
that 
Mr 
Koko 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   There is a distinction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 177 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   But  
CHAIRPERSON:   You confine yourself to that. 
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Just to conclude Mr Seleka.  The purpose for 
the meeting of the 1 s t of March, I knew what I wanted to 
discuss ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...with Mr Govender who was the Project 
Manager.  I was very clear.  But also, I was in an issue.  
10 
Go to the minutes of...  Oh, ja.  The second part I wanted 
to discuss Mr Seleka and that question was rhetorical.  If 
you go to the minutes of the 8 t h of August 2016, you will 
see in there that I was one of the persons delegated by 
PTC to conclude this contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR KOKO:   I was – I knew that and my thought was that:  
Hang on.  I was in that meeting when you guys made a 
presentation.  And the board delegated to me.  But this has 
never come to me and now I must approve R 460 million.  
20 
You may have done a good job.  I am not query that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But truly, I deserve much better level of 
involvement.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 178 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   And I think this is the only reason why this 
document came. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that.  I think, come closer to 
the mic. 
MR KOKO:   I think this is the only reason why this 
document came to me because they knew that I was one of 
the delegators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean, the reason – that is the 
reason why it came to you late? 
MR KOKO:   After ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   After payment had been made? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   They realised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they realised that you would 
not approve? 
MR KOKO:   Well, they realised two things.  That they 
would have difficulty and two, in terms of the board they 
had to consult with me.  It is misconduct if they do not do.  
And now that it is done, let us do it after the facts and we 
20 
hope that he does not have the presence of minds or he 
agrees with us, he just signs and then he give – back and 
it is... [Speaker not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, would they...  Well, before 
payment could be made, somebody must have approved it 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 179 of 260 
 
and ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   And that somebody is supposed to be me in 
terms of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Now, who – the question is, who 
approved it?  And if that person was not the right person, 
why was payment effected? 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  Chairman, now you are going exactly to 
what I have been telling you all along. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR KOKO:   Managing contract... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR KOKO:   You will not take more than an hour to get 
your answer.  And that is why we call in the investigators 
because it is easy.  You go to Eskom, you give them the 
appropriate number, they are going to SAP(?).  They will 
draw out the document that you will see that is not legible 
and this document will tell you exactly who was involved 
and that person must give you the authority he relied on to 
produce this document.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR KOKO:   And the only reason Chairman I think that that 
has not been happening is because it will lead them the 
people who have always condemned me.  It will lead them 
to a different target but they are fixated on me and that is 
why they do not want to do anything that will lead them to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 180 of 260 
 
the other people.  It is quite simple Chair.   
 
We should not – I should not be sitting here 
explaining these invoices.  I did not participate.  I had 
nothing to do with that.  I should not be here.  I should not 
be the person whose name arose out of North Gauteng 
High Court.  I should not be the one.  But these things are 
– you know, it hunt, we want this guy.  Show us anything 
that we can get that we can get him.   
 
When Mr Seleka went through the McKinsey 
invoices and I got very upset, if you remember and I even 
10 
used an unfortunate word that you are twisting these 
things.  It is because I thought you...  Mr Seleka, these 
emails, these seven emails we are spending the whole day 
doing have got nothing to do with the MSA.  Ever.  
Absolutely nothing to do with the MSA.   
 
I am wondering why we are spending the whole 
day trying to link me to them because they do not.  And I 
am pleased that McKinsey has come out yesterday to say 
actually they do not.  But we should not have spent the 
whole day, previous day.  Now we are running at town on 
20 
seven invoices – seven emails that have nothing to do with 
the MSA except that you – it is a hunt.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, those questions that I am asking 
Mr Seleka, are they answers in terms of what you have got 
there.  The affidavits have got the information.  Who 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 181 of 260 
 
approved this payment?  Because before payment was 
made somebody must have approved.  And if the person 
who approved, was the person who approved authorised to 
approve?   
 
Mr Koko says he was the delegated person.  And 
what explanation is there for that approval to have been 
made if there is an approval?  Or did the payment get 
made without approval?  And what is the explanation?  And 
was 
the 
explanation 
from 
Mr 
Suzanne 
Daniels 
and 
Mr Mabelane...   
10 
 
Who was the other?  Mr Govender in the memo 
of 17 February 2017 for seeking Mr Koko’s approval after 
the payment had been made?  Were they aware that 
payment 
was 
made 
or 
was 
effected 
on 
the 
22 n d  of February?  So those questions. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, you know, SIU ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   You know SIU has served me summons that 
the money is R 600 million.  That R 3.8 billion is for me.  
And we will get into the McKinsey – we will get into – but 
20 
R 600 million of that are these invoices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   And every time when they Tweet ...[indistinct] 
Zuma(?).  So I Tweet back and said:  Can you update the 
nation about the R 3.8 billion?   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 182 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   Because they are on – and just on the record.  
Because I am on TV I have to say they are on a hunt for 
nothing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR KOKO:   I mean, if you look at the documents here, you 
can see that the only reason SIU and Eskom invoice 
against me giving – having regards of the evidence that is 
here is because they want to pin somebody.  Somebody – 
they want to pin/twist(?) somebody that says:  We are on 
10 
the hunt and we are resolute.  We will even issue invoices 
– summons even when there are no prospects of success 
given the evidence that is here.  It is sad.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  I have just enquired from 
the investigators.  They have – they do not have affidavits 
from 
witnesses 
addressing 
these 
questions. 
 
Their 
investigation has, however, uncovered who would have 
done the authorisation and so on but I think we will have to 
20 
pursue that with the individuals who ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...played the roles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we need to have affidavits from 
those people. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 183 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the people who can answer those 
questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then, the matter is urgent because 
we do not have time in terms of the time left for the 
Commission to finish.  So it is urgent and they may have to 
be or some of them, one more, may have to be called to 
give evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So.  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chair, that means there are a 
couple of things.  Can I just correct one thing?  Mr Koko, 
the only invoice on which we led evidence was the 
R 30.6 million and that was in respect of Mr Singh because 
he received that invoice and we were putting to him that he 
forwarded the invoice in order for the payment process to 
take its course. 
MR KOKO:   That is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  The other invoice, I have not 
20 
referred to that. 
MR KOKO:   It is correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  So I could not have been said to 
have been mistaken or whether I am twisting something. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no Chair.  I – Mr Seleka is correct.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 184 of 260 
 
He 
– 
the 
only 
invoice 
he 
has 
referred 
to 
is 
the 
R 30.6 million invoice.  I do not – maybe I am slowing down 
but I did not – I do not remember saying you dealt with the 
others.  No, I ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh. 
MR KOKO:   If I did, I take it back.  All that I said was, we 
spent the whole day on the 29 t h of March on the seven 
invoices - on the seven ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Emails. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, maybe that is why. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if it is emails or invoice but 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   The emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   On the emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   We spent on the seven ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But the emails, were the emails not 
about the ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   MSA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...the 
emails 
with 
Infoportal 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and the travelling? 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 185 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was different. 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no.  It was seven invoices on 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Seven invoices, okay. 
MR KOKO:   Seven ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Emails. 
MR KOKO:   ...emails on McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   One was at Medupi, one was the – and I know 
them well, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Because I remember them well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And that is why I got a little bit upset with 
Mr Seleka and say you are twisting some of this because I 
knew 
those 
– 
I 
knew 
the 
contents 
of 
the 
emails 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...and how they arose ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   ...and why.  And I also knew that they had 
nothing to do with the MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   Absolutely nothing to do with the MSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 186 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   And my question was that, here we are sitting 
and looking at those emails that have nothing to do with – 
and say – and I am just being dragged into it.  And I am 
relieved that McKinsey has clarified that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  No, no that is fine.  But I do 
not know whether this does happen.  It may well be that 
what happens is this.  Mr Koko gets given affidavits that 
are said to implicate him or maybe implicating you.  He sits 
with his lawyers and they prepare responses and that is 
that, but there are no sessions involving the investigators 
10 
of the Commission or the Legal Team with Mr Koko with or 
without his legal team to look at matters and pick up 
anything like these ahead of ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Ja, but Chair let me again apologise upfront.  
I am hurting.  I am hurting.  For three years I have heard 
the same story, twenty times, a hundred times that is false.  
Rumours that have been become factual.  And Mr Seleka 
may be caught in that crossfire for believing innocently.  I 
think he is not – I think the problem is me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well.  I am just saying, you know, for 
20 
example, some of the things you raise about certain emails 
or invoices or whatever, some of the issues you point out, 
maybe in an affidavit you deal with them in a certain way 
but in a consultation when you – if you are asked and you 
deal with them it may be apparent that no this one needs 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 187 of 260 
 
further investigation before it goes to a hearing or that kind 
of thing.  So I am simply saying I do not know whether that 
does happen.  Maybe it does not happen. 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  Chair, ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And it might help. 
MR KOKO:   ...it has not happened and that is for the 
better Chair.  I think we are better off now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, the practise.  That is the 
general practise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That has not happened in respect of 
Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would help, I think, as I say, there will 
be no problem if his counsel is there as well.  It would be 
no problem.  It would help because ahead of the hearing 
the Legal Team would know exactly what he has to say 
about certain things and it would be able to say:  No, these 
20 
will need to be investigated further before it goes to the 
hearing because ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for example, he may be having a point 
that has not been picked up and so on and so on. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 188 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if there is still room to do it that 
might help. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I see we are at four o’clock.  Let us take 
an adjournment or you want to close – to ask one or two 
before we can adjourn and then ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, let us finish off because I – well, 
10 
that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   The problem I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought we have finished off the topic 
of ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   A topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That I know ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   My counsel gave me instruction – on how to 
answer you... 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay alright.  No, let us take 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let us take ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...let us take an adjournment.  But let us 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 189 of 260 
 
talk about the way forward.  We will take an adjournment 
and we will come back.  How far are we from reaching a 
point where subject to issues that might still be – have to 
investigated in terms of your planning?  How far are we 
from reaching a point where you be done with Mr Koko? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it another day?  Is it half a day?  Is it 
an X number of hours or is it...? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Chair, I wish I could give you 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know that is not entirely in your 
control. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Ja, I thought I was struggling 
with Mr(?) Matshepo but Mr Koko is on the other side.  
[laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I am going to try to help you, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You are going to help? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs]   
20 
MR KOKO:   [Speaker is not clear] ...finish.  I am going to 
slightly(?) help you, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So.  I mean, if you look at the issues 
that we have to cover Chair.  If we finish McKinsey now, we 
will be left with Tegeta issues. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 190 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which are also quite extensive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And we will have to touch on the travel 
agent evidence as well.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So I am thinking.  Mr Koko helping me. 
MR KOKO:   [Speaker not close to microphone – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it might not be unreasonable to say 
Tegeta not more than three hours or is that ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is too short. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is too short?  Or not more than four 
hours? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  But certainly we – for you to 
finish ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...we would not need more than a day. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is at the most a day but it could be 
less. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me ask Mr Barry.  In terms of your 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 191 of 260 
 
own assessment, when you come to re-examination, what 
is your estimation at the moment of how much time you 
might need? 
ADV BARRY:   We would estimate five hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Really?  Five hours? 
ADV BARRY:   ...measures.  We estimate five hours.  We 
will try to take measure in terms of our preparation of 
documentation to try and shorten that if it is possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV BARRY:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV BARRY:   Unfortunately, I think it is... [Speaker is not 
clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV BARRY:   ...Mr Koko is here.  So there is quite a bit 
of terrain that we will cover. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no that ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRY:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But give me an idea. 
ADV BARRY:   As you pleases. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  I think we will adjourn 
now and then we will come back but this evening I would 
like us to not go beyond six.  That is point one.  Point two.  
Tomorrow and Thursday, I set aside for a certain witness 
and I am told that there might be challenges.  Now I 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 192 of 260 
 
mentioned that only in the event that everybody says we 
can use tomorrow or part of tomorrow or Thursday or part 
of Thursday if that other witness, those challenges do not – 
if those challenges materialise but I think Mr Barry 
indicates that there would be a problem of availability and I 
understand because short notice.  So it was simply a 
question of just in case.  So if ...[intervenes]  
ADV BARRY:   Chair, I am so sorry but my client is spoken 
for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine.  That is fair enough. 
10 
ADV BARRY:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fair enough.  But what we – 
what I think we – I would like us to do is, maybe when we 
adjourn, is to see whether we can identify some evening 
sessions that we can look at maybe next week or as soon 
as possible because maybe weekdays – I mean, weekdays 
might be problematic.  So.  But we can talk at the time.  
We can talk at the time and see what is possible and what 
is not possible.  Okay, let us take tea adjournment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
We 
will 
resume 
at 
twenty 
past 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, just before that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   May I indicate to the Chairperson.  I 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 193 of 260 
 
managed to speak to Ms Van Rooyen and the IT expert.  
They were not able to come at lunch time.  They will come 
at half-past four. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At half-past four? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Half-past four, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, I think maybe they can hear 
us.  They can hear – as I do not know how much time that 
discussion would need.  I mean, at least if they had said 
four o’clock because that is when we take an adjournment.  
They will have to wait a bit.  Maybe we will take an 
10 
adjournment after – because now if we go up to four, then 
half-past four, that is too long an adjournment.   
 
So they will just have to wait so that then that 
discussion can take place.  We can take a ten minutes 
break later on.  Maybe we should – I should just say, let us 
say we will take a ten minutes break at five.  So – or 
maybe they can hear me.  So they do not have to come 
immediately.  They can be tight in with one another. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay alright.  Let us take a ten 
20 
minutes adjournment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 194 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Yes, thank you, Mr 
Koko, you have taken us through those documents.  What I 
wanted to say in regard to the document is that – and 
particularly the transaction, the MSA, is that from the 
evidence one sees that there were various role-players at 
any given moment including the steering committee which 
would have had some oversight role to play, in regard to 
the services that are granted – I mean, services, yes, that 
are rendered under this MSA.  So once the writing is on the 
wall, the bidder from [indistinct], all those who are in the 
10 
steering committee should take – and I want you to 
comment on this – should they not take the responsibility 
to put brakes on this because the agreement lacks the 
necessary Treasury approval, why should we carry on with 
it, because it is only terminated in June 2016 which is said 
to have been concluded in January 2016 and there is this 
R1.6 billion that gets to be paid in order to addressing the 
last payment, which is 460, but there were payments prior 
to that, that were made, and the question is, this steering 
committee, which seems to have been the interface 
20 
between Eskom – or let me say the eyes and ears of 
Eskom.  The question is, why did it not do or take steps 
necessary to safeguard the interests of Eskom? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, the steering committee took steps.  
There is no doubt about that.  The only thing that you may 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 195 of 260 
 
fault the steering committee of having done is to agree – is 
to terminate and agree on a period of at least six months.  
That is what they have agreed on.  I actually do not think 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry, that is what they…? 
MR KOKO:   Have agreed on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They say they terminated the agreement 
on six months notice. 
MR KOKO:   I think there was a transition, I do not think it 
was immediately. 
10 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
No, 
the 
termination 
was 
with 
immediate effect according to the letter of 16 June 2016.  
But the transition, Mr Anoj Singh spoke about that. 
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Whether it is a transition or whatever it 
is. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair, now remember you are talking to 
somebody who does not have personal knowledge to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
So 
please 
take 
my 
answer 
– 
my 
20 
understanding, from where I was, is that there was a 
transition period …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A period of about six months. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   After the – after Eskom had given and 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 196 of 260 
 
told them that they are terminating. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes, yes.  That is one thing.  The second 
thing that I think has disappeared and that is because I 
think we are now – it is in hindsight and we throwing the 
baby with the bath and about two, three weeks ago I had 
the time to listen to Dr Alexander Weiss.  Chairman, if 
anybody tells you, and I have heard that evidence, that 
there was no value created, is lying to you.  He is lying to 
you and I am one of – I will be the first one to defend that 
the men and women of McKinsey and Eskom created value 
10 
out of McKinsey.  I think at one point they valued it at 
about R24 billion.  Now it is a value I agree with, that the 
value that McKinsey and Eskom engineers added in that 
short space of time amounted to – the way I will put it, I 
will not put at R24 billion, I will say it was a lot, but I will 
not put it to R24 billion but I have no doubt, and I managed 
Generation, and Chairman, what I have not given you, you 
will find it in MMK47, it is an affidavit of a senior general 
manager who in my area of business was responsible for 
McKinsey and he again says I was the main person 
20 
responsible.   Mr Koko was not responsible for this but the 
value at Majuba, it was a case study at Eskom, it is in 
billions. So I will not agree with anybody who says – and I 
have heard that, who says the McKinsey/Eskom team did 
not get value under the MSA.  I will not agree with that.  I 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 197 of 260 
 
think that is a different discussion, I am hundred percent 
behind the team, Anoj, Mr Mabelane, Prish, on the work 
that they have done, the value – we stopped load 
shedding, Chairman.   
I mean I heard you – and this is one thing I thought 
I will find an opportunity  to talk to you about that says 
state capture destroyed Eskom.  You have no evidence to 
suggest that.  If you look 
at the Eskom 
graph 
of 
performance, you cannot argue that because of state 
capture Eskom performance collapsed.  To the contrary 
10 
you can argue that because Mr Molefe and myself and 
others were fired, Eskom performance collapsed.  So you 
have no –you are going to struggle and you are going to 
set yourself up to suggest …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Koko, you have said that a number of 
times, so… 
MR KOKO:   I am going to say it twenty times, it is very 
important.  But, Chair, all that I am saying to you 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have noted it.  
20 
MR KOKO:   Ja, all that I am saying is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have noted it …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   All that I am saying to you, all I am 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have noted it, you have made – and it 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 198 of 260 
 
is quite in order for you to make a point, namely when 
during the time when you were there, Mr Brian Molefe was 
there and whoever or during the time that you were there, 
when you talk about yourself alone. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is quite in order for you to say if you 
say because of this and that and that there was poor 
performance or performance declined, that is not true 
because during my time this is the performance that I can 
back up, this is the performance that is known or during 
10 
the time when it is said that state capture had occurred at 
Eskom, the irony is that the performance was good.  You 
are entitled to make that point. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So all I was just saying is I have noted 
the point, ja. 
MR KOKO:   I have made this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But just to be direct to Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   I think the termination was done at the right 
time and I may be wrong and you – I may be wrong or you 
may not be happy with the answer but I thought the 
transition made sense, it would have been the value of 
work that was done. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 199 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Well, I am talking about that in 
relation to your evidence to the Chairperson that by 
February/March the writing was on the wall, but the 
termination only takes place in June 2016.  There is that 
time lapse which is a significant amount of time from 
February/March to June 2016 and during that time, even 
thereafter, the steering committee continues to meet. 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  But, Chair, I think this thing – the 
delegations of authority is to the project manager, it is not 
10 
to the steering committee.  Delegations of authority are 
very clear.  The main role of a steering committee was 
performance, that was the main role but all the executives 
that are there and I think there were – at one point that 
room was full, there were about 15 of us there, all of us 
are wearing our own – I am wearing the Generation 
Technology hat, I am looking at that, somebody is looking 
at the – the Transmission hat is looking at that, does not 
help the overall – the overall picture is for the project 
manager.  I am not sure if I would agree with you there, I 
20 
would not agree with you.  It looks like  - especially, to be 
exact, especially when McKinsey came back to ask the 
letter and I speak under the correction, that letter must 
have been around the last week of March.  28, 30 March. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What letter? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 200 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   The letter where McKinsey said we have done 
a due diligence and we do not support – we will not do 
business 
with 
McKinsey. 
 
I 
think 
that 
was 
around 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   30 March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With Trillian, you mean. 
MR KOKO:   With Trillian, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I think it must have been, to be exact, it is 
probably 29 March, if I can be right. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, around there. 
MR KOKO:   And that is the time that really you can put on 
focus and say between the 29 March to the date when it 
was cancelled, I do not remember, maybe [indistinct].  I 
can only say that where it became very obvious that we 
really have to terminate is when we got that letter from 
McKinsey on the 29 March because then – like I said, to 
repeat 
myself, 
Chair, 
without 
being 
a 
nonsense, 
nonsensical, is that the writing on the wall was there 
around February when it became obviously that we do not 
20 
have National Treasury support and the letter of the 29, 30 
March 2016, I think that would have killed the cat. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but that letter is completely 
unrelated to the requirement for National Treasury. 
MR KOKO:   Most certainly. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 201 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Most certainly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So what I am saying to you is it cannot 
be linked to Eskom.  When Eskom becomes aware, we do 
not have National Treasury approval. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I will not quibble with that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   I think that is right, except that all what I am 
simply saying is that the letter of the 30 t h or 29 March 2016 
just compounds the problem. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Why does it compound because 
McKinsey is free to subcontract whoever. 
MR KOKO:   And they – and I was with them on their side 
because from day one we should not be telling McKinsey 
go there, we should not be telling that except that now we 
are having so much work, so much we generated without 
complying to the 30% from the board and there is no end in 
sight.  Now we have to go back to the board and say you 
gave us an authority at least in six on the – in October 
2015 to contract with this gentleman and now 50%, we are 
20 
now in March and we still have not done that.  It just 
creates more compliance issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, I did not want to be rude 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Look, I am not going to – the two are not 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 202 of 260 
 
linked. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   That is not what I am… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   That is not what I am arguing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes. 
MR KOKO:   I am simply saying we are now getting into 
more compliance issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   yes. 
MR KOKO:   So now somebody has to go to the board and 
10 
say in October 2015 you said I must comply with this guy 
and that is an overnight compliance, now I am sitting in 
March 
and 
I 
have 
not 
met 
one 
of 
your 
conditions 
precedent.  I think that was a condition precedent, it was 
not a gatekeeper.  That is the terms we use, one was a 
gatekeeper and one was a conditions precedent. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.  You have taken the Chairperson 
to the R460 million payment, how you refused to sign that 
memo.  As the Acting CEO and becoming aware that this 
payment has been made, so now you are the most senior 
20 
executive. 
 
Any 
steps 
you 
took 
in 
regard 
to 
your 
subordinates? 
MR KOKO:   No. No, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair.  I became aware of the payment to 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 203 of 260 
 
Trillian 
when 
I 
was 
on 
suspension, 
second 
form 
of 
suspension, I read in the newspaper.  In fact I fielded 
questions, one of the questions that I got from our then 
communications specialist that you have paid Trillian 
money and I responded overnight, I said never, we have 
never paid Trillian, we never contracted with Trillian.  It 
turned out to be an embarrassment, it turned to be a lie.  It 
embarrassed the Minister because Eskom said – and in 
that case Eskom was me, it was me, I was the CE then.  I 
said nobody can tell me I have paid Trillian.  I have no 
10 
contract with Trillian, I have not paid Trillian and only when 
I was on suspension that I realised we have paid Trillian 
and it was a big embarrassment because our initial 
response was that we have never paid and the factual 
evidence actually came out to say we have paid Trillian.  I 
never had the opportunity to remedy the word.  In fact I 
never returned to work, I eventually resigned. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, so when you saw that in the 
newspapers would have been in 2017 sometime or…? 
20 
MR KOKO:   2017, that would have been 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, around which month?  March? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I am going to – I do not want to get into 
trouble but it would have been after the 15 May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is fine. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 204 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   It would have been after the 15 May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Yes, Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
MR KOKO:   And the reason I am saying 15 May it is 
because I was suspended on the 15 May. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Or rather, I took special leave on the 15 May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   So I was already at home. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR KOKO:   So I am just using that date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But, Mr Koko, that memo you gave us 
did tell you the payments that had been made prior to that 
R460 million.  So on the first page of the memo, not the 
covering note, paragraph 2 stated: 
“Following the negotiation process and both in the 
committee approval, MSA terminated in July 2016 
an 
amount 
of 
937 630 
paid 
to 
date 
on 
the 
settlement.” 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just mention, Mr Seleka, something 
that highlights the point that I made earlier on about 
arrangements to be made ahead [inaudible – speaking 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 205 of 260 
 
simultaneously] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because whoever reads the transcript, 
now when they read they hear you refer to this memo. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The memo does not have an exhibit 
number, it is not said in what bundle it is, on what page, it 
is to be found – they would be struggling. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whereas if we do it the way I suggested. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No documents would be referred to 
before it is in a bundle and can be located in the bundles, 
ja.  So we can continue but I am just illustrating the point 
that when somebody reads the transcript they want to look 
at this memo, they will struggle because nobody says in 
which bundle it is. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  But going forward I think we will try 
and do it that way. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me, for the record, use it as it is 
contained in Eskom bundle 15(a) page 363, is the same 
memo dated 17 February 2017 marked MMK35.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in that event – in that event it may 
well be that this one that has got the covering note. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 206 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I understood you to say that 
one does not have a covering note. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may well be that it will be appropriate 
to slot it immediately after that one and then find the right 
pagination so they are together. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Please continue. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, to answer Mr Seleka’s issue, on the 
10 
same memo, the first page of the memo, 2(b), that is what 
you read. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   There is nothing – I do not see anything 
wrong there, I do not think anything wrong being paid to 
McKinsey. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, we are dealing with - what you are 
saying 
is 
when 
you 
became 
aware 
payments 
to 
…[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Trillian. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You say to Trillian but I am talking 
payments under the Master Services Agreement. 
MR KOKO:   Oh no, I quite frankly had no problem with 
that and I will tell you why, Chair.  You know, we have a – 
if you read 1023 document, contracts are entered into 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 207 of 260 
 
irregularly but they bind Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But can I – sorry, sorry, Mr Koko, 
because the question is whether you became aware of this, 
that the payment was made under the Master Services 
Agreement upon receipt of this document. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes, this document is here.  Sorry, about 
that.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is all I want to… 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no…. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang, hang on, you might be talking at 
10 
cross purposes. 
MR KOKO:   I think we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is asking whether at the time you 
received this memo you became aware of the payment. 
MR KOKO:   And my answer is yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So did you receive it – you 
received it on the – when did you receive it? 
MR KOKO:   23 r d of… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   23 r d, okay.  Okay, no, that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   And just for the record, Chair, there is nothing 
wrong in McKinsey being paid the money that is said to 
have been paid, for as long as they have done the job.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 208 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   There is nothing wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is at the rate. 
MR KOKO:   And it is the right rate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   The answer I was – I thought I was answering 
when I even gave the date of when I was on special leave 
was the payment to Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To Trillian. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay.  The other one is a legal 
point which I do not want to trouble you with which is – you 
are saying you do not see a problem payment to McKinsey, 
is that notwithstanding that the agreement would not in fact 
have come into force because of lack or the want of 
Treasury approval? 
MR KOKO:   No, not at… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not at that level? 
MR KOKO:   Not that – no, no, no, remember that 
20 
McKinsey was on the job.  At a point in time it had a 
contract that we were working on.  We know now that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The contract was without Treasury 
approval. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 209 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   We know that now but at that point all 
documentations, including the email we are referring to , 
where Mr Seleka must refer you to, he has got it is his 
bundle.  I saw it on his bundle, 14, I think.  So he 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What is that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not speak away from the mic. 
MR KOKO:   So the email from Mr Solly Tshitangano who 
was then the Chief Procurement Officer in the Treasury 
department writing to Dave Gorey and it is that email that 
10 
was interpreted to be the authority to sign – to put the 
contract into effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To be the approval of Treasury. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   So everybody on these discussions, when 
they talk about National Treasury you will see they will 
always tell you refer to that email which I only had sight of 
during this process.  But I heard of it, I knew about it, but I 
had not …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think Mr Seleka may be asking the 
question as of now when you say you do not have a 
problem with …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   No, no, no, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether as you speak now you still say 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 210 of 260 
 
you have no problem or you are saying at that time you 
would not have had a problem. 
MR KOKO:   No, Chair.  No, Chair, I think I need to explain 
myself properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Before you answer let me clarify the 
Chairperson’s question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because, Chair, I am saying to you, Mr 
Koko, even then – because if the writing was on the wall in 
10 
February/March 2016, this letter comes to you in February 
of the following year, which is 2017. 
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   When you would have had a full year 
of knowing that but we have a problem with this contract. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And, Chair, there is nothing wrong with 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, there is nothing with? 
MR KOKO:   With the payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With the payment, right. 
20 
MR KOKO:   With the payment of a contract that is 
defective.  It is nothing wrong and the Eskom processes 
are very clear.  You have got a defective process but you 
have committed Eskom.  The supplier has done its job, you 
compensate the supplier for the work he has done.  The 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 211 of 260 
 
defective part of the contract, it is a misconduct on 
Eskom’s side.  You deal with your Eskom people.  Your 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Yes, 
so 
your 
answer 
is 
Eskom’s 
approach was if the job has been done in circumstances 
where there was a contract which relevant people thought 
was in order at the time. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are paying at the rate that has 
been agreed, that is in order.  Any deviation from 
10 
procedures that should have been followed is a matter to 
be dealt with separately but as far as Eskom was 
concerned, would not have been a ground to withhold 
payment. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what you are saying. 
MR KOKO:   Exactly.  And, Chairman, it is not me saying 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you are saying that was Eskom’s 
approach. 
20 
MR KOKO:   It is Eskom policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is Eskom policy. 
MR KOKO:   And this policy exists. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   And that I can say before I go home. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 212 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must make sure that it is one of the 
documents. 
MR KOKO:   You will not have to wait for – yes, before I go 
home I will say to you it is 10.34, I will get you to the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So you say that Eskom’s policy was 
quite clear. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If work has been done, there was a 
contract and - I mean, work was done, must be work was 
done as required or to the satisfaction of Eskom then 
10 
payment must be done and if payment is done at the right 
rate that is fine with Eskom, that was company policy. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR KOKO:   But the policy further goes beyond that, it 
says there has to be consequences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, for any unprocedural events. 
MR KOKO:   Exactly, exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   For putting Eskom in that position. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR KOKO:   There has to be – you cannot simply say there 
was a contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Work was done, the supplier is entitled, 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 213 of 260 
 
therefore I pay – in fact, in fact the policy is very onerous, 
it says if you put – if you find yourself in that position you 
cannot decide to pay.  You cannot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must report yourself first. 
MR KOKO:   You must report yourself first. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Go and report yourself and then the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody senior can take a decision. 
MR KOKO:   Somebody must take – you know, you have 
10 
committed conduct but you have committed Eskom will pay, 
but I will deal with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR KOKO:   The policy is very clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  No, that is fine. 
MR KOKO:   And that you will get today.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   You will not have to wait or rush other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I signed that policy into …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so that is why you know it so well. 
MR KOKO:   That is why, I signed these… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  We have traversed 
the issue of whether or not this agreement was in fact 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 214 of 260 
 
concluded by the time it was terminated, so I will not go 
into it because I want to go into your knowledge of – now I 
want to go into your knowledge of payments to Trillian – I 
mean – ja, to Trillian because it was under the MSA.  Now 
let us zoom into that Trillian which you were explaining to 
the Chairperson.  Chair and for this reason I would like us 
to turn to that submission document of 8 August 2016.  It is 
in Eskom bundle 14(c).  I think it is the bundle in front us.  
Page 829.25.  Mr Koko, you referred to this earlier.  
829.25, it is a submission document motivating for the 
10 
termination. 
MR KOKO:   829…? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   829.25. 
MR KOKO:   I am there, Chair. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You are there.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Point 25? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Submission document, 
executive summary dated 8 August 2016. 
ADV BARRIE SC:   Pardon me, I am not sure which 
bundle? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Bundle 14, Mr Barrie.  14(c) in your 
electronic.  Well, the electronic is not …[intervenes] 
MR KOKO:   Will just be… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The page number.  Let us go to the 
page number. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 215 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Ja, 829.25, bundle 14. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Mr Koko.  So the document 
reads, paragraph 1: 
“Title of the submission, feedback on McKinsey 
top 
consultant’s 
program 
MSA 
settlement 
process.” 
2: 
“Resolution 
required 
to 
BTC 
notes 
the 
following.  To date the initiatives under the top 
consultants program MSA have achieved more 
10 
than 18.6 billion rand of annualised impact for 
Eskom.” 
2.2: 
 
“Applying determination and settlement clause 
within the MSA, Eskom may need to pay up to 
2.84 billion rand inclusive of payment to the 
BEE partner for the value achieved to date.  
The 
BTC 
approves 
the 
following 
...” 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I stop you there?   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  On your approach Mr Koko, even this 
submission should not be making any reference to the BEE 
partner.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair, except ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 216 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of payment.   
MR KOKO:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR KOKO:   Exactly.  Exactly, you see and this is one of 
the ... if you look at the gate of the submissions, it is one 
of the submissions I gave you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.   
MR KOKO:   That I had no party to it.  I had no sight to it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR KOKO:   And if you look at the signatures are on page 
10 
29, point 32. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  I just wanted to confirm.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you may continue Mr Seleka.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is indeed one of the points Chair, 
and then: 
 
“BTC approves the following.  The already 
negotiated lower settlement value of 1.8 billion 
rand inclusive of payment to the BEE partner.  
The 1.8 billion rand settlement negotiated will 
20 
consist of an initial cash payment of 800 
million rand to cover the utilisation of the 
consultants resources to date.” 
 
Then we go to paragraph 2.7.  Paragraph 2.7 reads: 
 
“A group chief executive, group chief financial 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 217 of 260 
 
officer and group executive generation and 
technology are authorised to negotiate more 
favourable terms and conditions through the 
settlement process.” 
 
Now which one were you at that time, in paragraph 
2.7?  There is three designations. 
MR KOKO:  Group executive generation and technology. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Generation ... did you negotiate 
favourable terms? 
MR KOKO:   No Chair, and this is what I ... this is the point 
10 
I made earlier, that it is, this is the first meeting where I 
am delegated.  When I write the note to say who did the 
board, the BTC delegate ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was delegated by the BTC? 
MR KOKO:   Who was delegated ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR KOKO:   This is the delegation I am talking to.  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes, 
because 
you 
know 
what 
the 
delegation was.      
MR KOKO:   Because I know the delegation and I was in 
20 
this meeting.  I think I was in this meeting.  Yes, I think I 
was in this meeting.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Alright.   
MR KOKO:   I was in this meeting. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, that is the one point Mr Koko.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 218 of 260 
 
The other point is, this meeting authorised payment to the 
BEE partner.   
MR KOKO:   This payment authorised 1.8 billion to 
McKinsey and you see, they put in bracket including the 
BEE partner, but the payment is to the contracting party. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it is ... I think unlike the other 
memo. 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not to McKinsey and BEE partner.  
MR KOKO:   Exactly.  Exactly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is to McKinsey including.  
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.   
MR KOKO:   So the payment ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words what they are saying is, 
the whatever may be due to the BEE partner, is in this 
amount.   
MR KOKO:   So the 30% is met.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, whereas with the other submission 
that we were looking at earlier, where it said McKinsey and 
20 
BEE partner, it seems to me that that could be used by 
somebody who wants to pay the BEE partner directly. 
MR KOKO:   But that is what happened Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   To say but it was authorised.  
MR KOKO:   But that is what happened Chair.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 219 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so whereas here, it says inclusive.   
MR KOKO:   Exactly.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Hm ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know whether Mr Seleka you are 
on the same wave length but I am just articulating what the 
point is that Mr Koko is making.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Chair, at this point ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I can tell you now there was no doubt that the 
monies went to McKinsey. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The money? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The money is?  
MR KOKO:   Is going to McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  
MR KOKO:   There was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No doubt.   
MR KOKO:   No doubt.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Remember ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka, I am sorry.  Mr Koko, hang on 
20 
Mr Koko.  He came in while I was waiting for your answer.  
Are we on the same wave length?   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair, ja I see the choice of words is 
because I have, I know what subsequently happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, ja.  Obviously, I mean if you 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 220 of 260 
 
think differently, you can pursue that.  I was just wanting to 
indicate what my understanding is of the distinction that Mr 
Koko wanted to make.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Because it is curious in the first place 
Mr Koko, to even say we are paying McKinsey (inclusive of 
the BEE partner).  I do not even know whether they are 
saying they are paying McKinsey here.  If you look, if you 
read that paragraph 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 McKinsey is not 
10 
mentioned.  
 
But inclusive of payment to the BEE, of payment to 
the BEE partner is expressly mentioned.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  And the question is if you wanted to 
pay the main contractor, why do you even bother to 
mention the subcontractor.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   Ja, but Chair Mr Seleka wants me to own the 
document that does not belong to me.  
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I am answering the Chairperson’s 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  I think what he is doing, he is 
saying you might not be the owner of the document and 
you might not have participated.  But you are attaching a 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 221 of 260 
 
certain meaning or interpretation to a particular part of 
this, and he is questioning that meaning or interpretation 
that you attach ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Because I was there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember that I was saying I think this 
is the point he wants to make.   
MR KOKO:  Because I was there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   I was in that meeting.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
10 
MR KOKO:   I was in that meeting.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So in which case you are saying you are 
not just relying on what has been [indistinct]. 
MR KOKO:   No.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You are relying also on what transpired in 
the meeting.     
MR KOKO:   Not only was I in the meeting, but I was the 
custodian of the policy in that meeting.  I was the person 
to go ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MR KOKO:   I was the person in that meeting to hold the 
board stage to compliance.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know if that answered your 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 222 of 260 
 
question, but ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairman ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Feel free to put it if you want to.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, no, no.  Correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Koko, you wanted to say something.   
MR KOKO:   Yes, yes.  I wanted to, it is something that Mr 
Seleka will come back and haunt me on.  I was the 
custodian in 2015, not in 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   No.  That is the wrong impression.  
10 
That is a very wrong impression.   
MR KOKO:   I always tell my counsel you know, Mr Seleka 
looks for contradictions only when it matters to him.  Other 
people can contradict themselves, it is fine.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  But ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I just thought I must correct that Chair.  It is 
an important issue.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I mean how many days thereafter?  
On the 12 t h of August, payments were then made.  One to 
Trillian, and two ... two to Trillian, one to McKinsey.  The 
20 
amounts are staggering.  McKinsey is over 680 million 
rand.  To Trillian two payments are made.  One for over 
113 million rand and then 122 million rand.   
 
So this meeting and the committee, was it not 
aware of these payments being made after they were 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 223 of 260 
 
made?   
MR KOKO:  No, and I do not see how they could have been 
aware.  I just do not see process wise.      
ADV SELEKA SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I do not see how they could have been aware.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So does it mean that the BTC and the 
executives which included you, would have made the 
sessions and not ensured that whoever implements the 
decision, come back to account.  Give a report how these 
payments 
were 
made, 
because 
you 
see, 
the 
other 
10 
payments in December 2016 and ultimately the one that 
you have traversed of 460 million in February 2017.  
 
But confine yourself to the 2016 payments.  
MR KOKO:   The answer is no Chair.  The Eskom 
procedure and delegations of authority does not expect the 
committee to come back to report to the BTC.  The answer 
is no.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja, is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say committee?   
MR KOKO:   No, Mr Seleka says was there not supposed to 
20 
be a feedback? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
MR KOKO:   And the answer is no.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  
MR KOKO:   It is not Eskom policy, otherwise Eskom will 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 224 of 260 
 
stop working.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Is that on the basis that 
...[intervenes]     
MR KOKO:   The volumes Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is assumed that the decision of the 
BTC or board will be implemented.  
MR KOKO:   Correct, there is a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And if there is a problem then they can 
come back?      
MR KOKO:   Correct, correct.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
MR KOKO:   Correct.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   But reporting back, why would it bring 
Eskom to a standstill? 
MR KOKO:   Chairman ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because all you do is print out the 
document.  This is how we have paid.  You send to BTC or 
the steering committee.  It shows the payment’s date and 
who was paid.  
20 
MR KOKO:   Ja, Chair.  It is, that is how people have an 
impression of how things should happen.  So let me give 
you a practical, Eskom spends close to 160 billion rand a 
year.  That is over 16 billion rands a month, and you can 
take that to a daily amount.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 225 of 260 
 
 
If all those payments could go back to the board, 
the board will stop working.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously you would only take to the 
board amounts that are above a certain threshold.  You 
would not take the board everything.   
MR KOKO:  Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
I 
mean 
even 
with 
delegation 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Chair, so the assumption you are making is 
that the delegation, the amount of payment of a billion 
10 
rands are few in between. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, not necessarily.  I am simply saying 
even with the delegations in terms of authorisation of 
amounts, if a transaction is not more than so much, 
somebody down there can approve it.  If it is above a 
certain amount, somebody higher or a committee higher.  
 
If it is not everything comes to the CEO or Exco, 
but once you are talking about amounts that are above a 
certain 
amount, 
then 
maybe 
a 
transaction 
must 
be 
approved by the board.  So if one was talking of a situation 
20 
where the board needs to get a report back, equally it will 
have to be only in respect of payments that above 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Very clear.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 226 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   So you cannot spend money that is not 
authorised.  That is first of all.  Different procurement 
tender committees have got levels of authorisation.  So 
this, in this case we are talking about the board tender 
committee, and the amount that is authorised at that level 
is 750 million rand.   
 
So 
in 
proceeding 
with 
your 
logic, 
you 
are 
suggesting that every transaction that is 750 million rands, 
should report back that they have paid that amount.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But surely, well maybe he is suggesting 
10 
that I am saying if there were to be a process in terms of 
which there should be a report there, responding to what 
you were saying that every month it is I do not know how 
many billions that are paid by Eskom. 
 
Then if they had to get reports back on all of them.  
So all I was simply saying that logic would suggest that if 
there is to be a reporting back, it must be limited to certain 
amounts.   
MR KOKO:   Ja.  Chairman, I can tell you now and you can 
make that recommendation and my, and I may be biased.  A 
20 
normal person who has so much heads on experience is 
not the person to rely on because he has got a skin in the 
game.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but what ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   So I just do not think that it is going to be 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 227 of 260 
 
practical.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you saying that even if, even if 
the report back to a body such as the BTC or the board 
was limited to payments of certain amounts, that would not 
be practical?  Or are you saying ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   It will not be practical.  The volume of work 
going through BTC is in my view just too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is too much.  
MR KOKO:   The way it is being managed now and it is not 
as if it is not being managed.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
MR KOKO:   We have a what you call assurance and 
forensics.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR KOKO:   That do audits on projects on the money 
spent, looking for all these compliance issues.  So the 
money that gets paid.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR KOKO:   There is a full time team of people on a daily 
basis looking for these payments.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I think from my side I can 
understand a situation where the arrangement is you do 
not need to come back to us and say that this has been 
done.  This payment has been done.  You need to come 
back to us if there is a problem.  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 228 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   That is how it is done.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I can understand that situation.  
MR KOKO:   That is how it is.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You might trust your executives.  
MR KOKO:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And whoever else that ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   That is how it is.   
CHAIRPERSON:  If you have said this is fine, they will 
implement.      
MR KOKO:  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if they meet with problems in trying 
to implement, then they can come back.  
MR KOKO:   They have to.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  
MR KOKO:   No, they have to.  That is how it works.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   That is how it is right now as we speak.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Alright.  
MR KOKO:   That is how it is as we speak.  The way you 
have just articulated it, that is how it is at Eskom as we 
20 
speak.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no no that is fine.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Koko, so are you 
leaving 
the 
Chairperson 
with 
a 
message 
that 
these 
payments, these authorised payments that ultimately went 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 229 of 260 
 
up to 1.6 billion would have been made without the BTC 
knowing that payments were made separately.   
 
One to McKinsey, one to Trillian whenever they 
were made.   
MR KOKO:   Absolutely.  Absolutely.  That is exactly what I 
am saying.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that those who negotiated, or were 
authorised to negotiate, you say it did not happen, would 
also have not known that this is how these payments were 
made.   
10 
MR KOKO:   The people who negotiate the contracts, are 
not necessarily the people who manages the contract.  The 
project manager will know and that is how the procedure 
works, that [indistinct].  No one else will know unless he is 
told.   
 
But again, it is that procedure Chair and he says he 
has got an accounts payable policy, and I have also 
referred you to management, managing contract.  There is 
no way that if you are not in that chain that you will know.  
There is no way that the senior of Eskom will know.  
20 
 
There is no way.  There is no way that even the MD, 
or the group executive will know.  No, the project team will 
know and that is why we have to hold them accountable.  
That is why we have to make sure that they are properly 
trained.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 230 of 260 
 
 
That the right people are managed.  I mean take 
Modupi and Kosile for example.  Kosile alone is costing 
140 billion rands.  When I got to know that there is serious 
corruption happening there, I could not even prove it 
myself.  
 
I hear people on the street.  I had to ask people just 
go check this thing.  I could not know, but the project 
manager on site whose assets has been, what is the term 
Mr Barry?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Looted.  
10 
MR KOKO:   No.  What is the term when the asset 
forfeiture, you need ... this is your assets? 
ADV BARRY SC:  Seizure.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I have been seized.  
MR KOKO:   Yes, and this much Michael on his assets has 
been seized today and this ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The one you were tight with.  
MR KOKO:   Come again? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one you were tight with.  
MR KOKO:   But the point, I am throwing this in Chair, 
20 
because I have given Mr Seleka the audio visuals of the 
meeting of 2 March 2017.  That is where we had a fall out.  
Listen to those audios.  Listen to them and Ms Daniels 
came here and told you that the board took a decision to 
suspend Mr Koko.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 231 of 260 
 
 
Again, I have given to you the audio.  She was lying 
to you.  The board was simply saying we have an 
anonymous report that says Mr Koko is corrupt, go talk to 
him and Mr Koko is going to suspend, and by the way the 
people that I was suspending, have got their assets today, 
frozen and yet I was being suspended for that.  
 
All what I did to Mr Ngobane, is says Mr Ngobane, 
your body is protecting corruption and if you suspend me, 
you are going to go down with them.  But ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
10 
MR KOKO:   I have given it to Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR KOKO:   But the point I am making is Chair, is that the 
way the Eskom processes and procedures are wired, it will 
be unreasonable for you to expect the board of Eskom then 
to have known that Trillian was being paid.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR KOKO:   It would be extremely unreasonable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously, if they authorised the payment 
of Trillian, in circumstances where they should not, that is 
20 
a different matter.    
MR KOKO:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR KOKO:   Exactly.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 232 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Thank you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chair, the IT experts are here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, ja I see it is ten past, twelve minutes 
past.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I can take, I take it that ten minutes 
should do.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  For the purposes of this discussion.  If 
10 
you need more than ten minutes, then another arrangement 
would have to be made.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Which may include meeting virtually 
everyone concerned to discuss.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I obviously would like a report back 
in due course, to say this was the outcome of that 
discussion.  So I just say again that the purpose really is 
for Mr Koko in the presence of his legal team and 
20 
yourselves, and the specialist, and has Ms Sharon van 
Rooyen also arrived? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well, she is ... I understood that she is 
in meetings.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 233 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So she might not be here yet.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I think there is somebody else.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  The purposes for Mr Koko 
to indicate to the investigators and to the specialists, to 
the experts, exactly what he talked about earlier, which he 
said should be looked at in terms of the computer 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  His own computer, that of Ms Daniels.  I 
10 
cannot remember who else, but everyone and what he is 
talking about that should be ... that they would be looking 
for and they would be able to say we have looked for that, 
we did not find it, or it will not be possible because of A, B, 
C, D.  
 
Or it will be possible.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Or basically that is the purpose, because 
I want to make sure that we do not have a situation where 
something has not been looked at that should be looked at.  
20 
Ja.  So let me take, let us take ten minutes break.  Then, it 
is quarter past now.  
 
Let us say twenty past.  If within the time when I 
have to come back you have not, you are not done, then 
arrangements can be made for you to meet.  Six o’clock we 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 234 of 260 
 
will adjourn today.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That might be another opportunity or an 
arrangement can be made for the meeting to continue at 
another time.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, it will have to be until twenty five 
past Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja.  Okay.  Okay, let us make it 15 
minutes and say half past.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so we adjourn.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.  I think we will 
give the Chairperson – report back in due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Since we have taken the first step. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And we need the second step 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...and then we can give you some 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 235 of 260 
 
feedback. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And take it from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As long as that is dealt with the urgency 
that it ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...it deserves, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Thank you.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, we are going to adjourn at six. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   As Chairperson indicated.  Maybe we 
should quickly deal with the issue of the travel agent.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  You do not want to continue with 
what you were – or you are done with the topic you are 
dealing with? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have come to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   A certain point? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have come to the what I think is the 
end of the McKinsey/Trillian. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I know Mr Koko is coming back.  
So I did not want to completely shut it down. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 236 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  You are not closing it but 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at this stage, you  ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you think that there might not be 
anything further but there might be. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us go to that, and then next 
time you can see if there is anything else outstanding on 
the McKinsey. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And then we will go into the bigger 
one, Tegeta issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that will take us to Eskom Bundle 
18. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One, eight. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The documents that were handed up, we 
do not really have to keep them because they will be put in 
a file.  Is that correct? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 237 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  That is correct, Chair.  
That is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That would be filed.  Okay. 
MR KOKO:   18...   
CHAIRPERSON:   Bundle 18, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   18, yes.  18(b). 
MR KOKO:   [Speaker not close to microphone – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you need help?  Somebody must help 
Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, I got it.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The specific page relevant to Mr Koko 
is 1565.7.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1565.7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1565.7.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Mr Koko, this ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not forget to arrange for these 
witnesses from Travel Excellence coming to give oral 
evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have, in fact, mentioned that already 
to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But Mr Koko, the affidavit starts on 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 238 of 260 
 
page 1565.1.  That is the affidavit of Ms Sameera Suliman, 
an adult female employed as a Travel Agent working at 
Double Excellence t/a Travel Excellence.  It is paragraph 1 
of the affidavit.  The next page, page 1565.2, she gives the 
background.  Background to my relationship with mister – 
or with Ms Alemi Alana.  Paragraph 4: 
“Both I and Ms Alemi Alana have been working 
in the travel industry for the last 30-years. 
At a point and time, both and Ms Alana worked 
together 
at 
a 
travel 
agency 
called 
Sure 
10 
Freeway Travel. 
I later went on to join the travel agency named 
Harvey World Travel and Ms Alana left to start-
up her own agency....” 
 
Background to Travel Excellence, paragraph 6: 
“Travel Excellence is a travel agency which 
was founded during 2013 by Ms Alana. 
The company is solely owned by Ms Alana’s 
father...” 
 
And the name is given, Mr Shariff Husain Alana, 
20 
who is a Director and effectively a silent partner. 
“Due to the nature of the company, no start-up 
funding was required. 
Travel 
Excellence 
specialises 
in 
the 
arrangements of flights, hotel accommodation, 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 239 of 260 
 
transfers, visas, tours and travel insurance 
around the world. 
Travel Excellence does not have its own 
license with the International Electronic Board 
Association. 
Thus we made use of license operators. 
We 
used 
Serendipity 
Tours 
CC 
for 
a 
consortium of travel agencies to make our 
bookings. 
The fact that we do not have an IAT licence 
10 
means that we cannot issue our own airline 
tickets.   
We are able ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, why are you reading all of 
that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I was going to ask the 
Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Koko has read ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...to move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have read that. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   [Speaker unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can go to the real issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 240 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Chairman, before we do that.  There is a 
confirmatory affidavit of Ms Alana ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   ...on this affidavit.  Which page is that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The confirmatory ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It must be immediately after this one, I 
think. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it before? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me see.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is at page 1575. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, 1575.   
MR KOKO:   Chair, that is the housekeeping issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   The confirmatory affidavit was signed on the 
17 t h of March 2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR KOKO:   And the affidavit of Ms Suliman was signed on 
the 17 t h of March 2021.  And page 1565.3 has got changes 
that we have done on the 23 r d of March 2021.   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that paragraph 14? 
MR KOKO:   Paragraph ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   1565.3, what paragraph? 
MR KOKO:   Paragraph 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   14? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 241 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  H’m 
MR KOKO:   It is not my understanding ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Oh, 
okay. 
 
Oh, 
you 
say 
those 
handwritten... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, changes for ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it because of the SAP stamp at the 
top that – is that stamp that the date of that stamp that 
makes you think this amendment was made on that date? 
MR KOKO:   I can only ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   On 23? 
MR KOKO:   I can only make the conclusion, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR KOKO:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
And 
in 
that 
case, 
those 
changes 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Were not ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   ...were not confirmed by Ms Alana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes.  And I am inclined to ask for the affidavit 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...that was confirmed by Ms Alana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that? 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 242 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
MR KOKO:   I am inclined to ask for the affidavit that was 
confirmed by Ms Alana on the 17 t h of March 2021.  Chair, 
there is a reason I am getting to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  Obviously, I want to 
understand that.  Yes.  Just elaborate.  If Ms Suleiman’s 
affidavit deposed to and signed by Ms Suliman after the 
17 t h of March 2021, I could understand the point that says 
Miss – is it Halima? – could not have confirmed that 
10 
affidavit because it did not exist.  If you say because of the 
amendment to which you have brought my attention, then 
Mr Halima could not have confirmed this affidavit because 
it did not exist.  I would say there is a difficulty with that 
because they are on the same date but if you say 
Ms Halima did not and could not have confirmed that 
amendment because it was made after, that I also I 
understand. 
MR KOKO:   That is my point, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that I understand.  If it is about 
20 
the amendment, I understand. 
MR KOKO:   It is about the amendment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no I understand that point. 
MR KOKO:   And I am saying he(?) deposed – he(?) 
confirmed 
an 
affidavit 
that 
existed 
on 
the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 243 of 260 
 
17 t h  of March 2021. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are saying she has not confirmed 
the amendment? 
MR KOKO:   She has not confirmed the amendment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no that I do understand. 
MR KOKO:   And it is material, Chair.  And we will get to 
that.  I want to see what she – confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
10 
MR KOKO:   I want to see in particular what she actually 
confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, on the face of it, I am taking 
it, but it is not conclusive, I am taking it that she confirmed 
this affidavit without the amendment. 
MR KOKO:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what would be required is for 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   The affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...her to be shown the affidavit after it 
20 
has been amended and for her to say whether she confirms 
that in terms, by way of another affidavit whether she 
confirms that or not.  So that would be what is required 
because she might say:  Well, I confirmed that when I saw 
this affidavit and signed my confirmatory affidavit, this 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 244 of 260 
 
amendment was not there.  Or whatever she says.  But if – 
she can then say whether with the amendment being there, 
is it true, is it correct.  She can then say that. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, we are going to come back to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Because this is the witnesses.  Some – when I 
started ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...at the beginning, I said to you there has to 
be consequences to witnesses who come here for the 
10 
purpose of directing you away from the truth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  No, no there is no problem.  We – 
to 
the 
extent 
that 
you 
want 
to 
come 
back 
to 
it 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, I am going to follow ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you will have to do that. 
MR KOKO:   I am going to follow the tune of Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Please do not lower your voice 
because ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I am going to follow the tune of Mr Seleka. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And let him conclude this trend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And then I will come and show you the 
falsehood of both Ms Alana ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 245 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   and Ms Suliman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And then I am going to ask you Chair that 
there has to be consequences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Ja. 
MR KOKO:   This cannot continue like this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   It damages people’s reputation.  It destroys 
people completely.  Tomorrow’s headlines, Salim Essa paid 
10 
for Koko’s trips.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is an important point.  But as 
Mr Seleka asks questions, if there is anything that you 
want to say as you respond to his questions, is that it 
substantiates the point you make about this being false, 
feel free to do that, even if you will come back later. 
MR KOKO:   No, certainly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
Certainly, 
Chair. 
 
I 
have 
watched 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...the Zondo on TV too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   I know what you expect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 246 of 260 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So Mr Koko, let us 
go to where the affidavit deals with you.  By the way, 
Chair, I should say, Mr Koko in response to this preliminary 
aspect.  The original affidavit prior to amendment was 
forwarded to your teams(?).  I think they did, pursuant to 
that, asked whether we could give the affidavit that 
Ms Sameera Suliman says she deposed or submitted to the 
Hawks. 
MR KOKO:   Okay.  So my attorneys have it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
10 
MR KOKO:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   So the change there, Chair, she is 
correcting that she was the one who submitted it.  She 
changes it into saying it was Ms Alana who submitted the 
affidavit. 
MR KOKO:   So I have provided the investigators of the 
Commission 
with 
the 
documents 
I 
still 
have 
in 
my 
possession including documentation attached to a previous 
affidavit that I submitted to the Hawks. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is what she has said. 
20 
MR KOKO:   Yes, and that is what Ms Alana confirmed.  
Ms Suliman ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, sorry.  No.  Remember, Ms Alana 
confirms the affidavit only insofar as it refers to her.  So 
the original affidavit did not have Ms Alana as the person 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 247 of 260 
 
who submitted, it had Ms Suliman saying:  I submitted to 
the Hawks.   
MR KOKO:   Ja-no, no.  I understand that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Ja.  So Ms Suliman wrote an affidavit that 
says she submitted an affidavit to the Hawks which she did 
not do. H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I was just looking at this  
MR KOKO:   Chair, this is not material. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no but that is fine.  But I – as you 
10 
were talking, both of you, I was looking at the sentence.  
She says:   
“I 
provided 
the 
investigators 
of 
the 
Commission with the documents I still have in 
my 
possession 
including 
documentation 
attached to a previous affidavit submitted to 
the Hawks.   
 
Now her previous affidavit submitted to the 
Hawks...  Okay, now I – maybe I understand what she...  
Okay.  You see, the amendment that she has made seeks 
20 
to make it clear that she is talking about a previous 
affidavit submitted to the Hawks by Ms Alana after the 
amendment.  That is what comes.  That is how I 
understand it. 
MR KOKO:   Yes, Chair. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 248 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But without the amendment it seems to 
that – initially, I thought that the reference to her previous 
affidavit submitted to the Hawks might not necessarily have 
meant an affidavit, previous affidavit submitted to the 
Hawks by her but on reflection, I see that because she – of 
what she says earlier in the sentence, namely:   
“I 
provided 
the 
investigators 
of 
the 
Commission with the documents I still have...” 
 
Okay.  Well, maybe ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   [Speaker unclear] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe without the amendment it might 
still ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Chairman, without the amendment it is very 
clear.  She submitted an affidavit to the Hawks... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I submitted to the Hawks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes...  I...  Well, there is – first she says 
she submitted – she provided the investigators of the 
Commission with the documents that she still had in her 
possession ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR KOKO:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And then if you stop there then this 
problem about the Hawks does not arise. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But then she includes – she continues:  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 249 of 260 
 
Including documentation.  She is now talking about – she 
is saying what she – the documents she submitted to the 
investigators of the Commission included documentation 
attached to a previous affidavit submitted to the Hawks.  
Now I was saying.  Maybe that wide enough to say it does 
not necessarily means submitted by her but I was saying, 
well, maybe on balance it means submitted by her.   
MR KOKO:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe for now we do not need to 
exhaust this. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Chair, we do not need to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Either she submitted an affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Or Ms Alana submitted an affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   Her changes ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Make it clear. 
MR 
KOKO: 
 
 
...had 
– 
the 
changes 
simply 
says 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...Ms Alana ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Submitted. 
MR KOKO:   ...submitted. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 250 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   I am happy to proceed with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But before Mr Seleka goes to the paragraph 
she(?) wants to go to, I want to refer you to paragraph 17.  
Paragraph 17 says: 
“At Travel Excellence I usually dealt with 
Mr Essa directly. 
I do not believe Ms Alana ever dealt with him 
directly...” 
10 
 
And that is – and Ms Alana confirms that that 
she has never dealt with Mr Salim Essa directly but she 
deposes of an affidavit, she having not dealt directly with 
Mr Essa.  She thinks she is competent and have knowledge 
to depose to an affidavit to the Hawks that says Mr Koko – 
Mr Salim Essa paid for Mr Koko for a trip to Dubai.  I find 
that eye-browsing but I do not want to go into the details. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is fine. 
MR KOKO:   If you get into the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR KOKO:   ...it – as you – you will see these things built 
up and it is going to pop up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine, ja. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 251 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   These people are... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   Let’s...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
MR KOKO:   All that I am simply saying is that, she 
confirmed that she has not had direct dealings with 
Mr Essa but she then depose – she deemed it proper that 
not Ms Suliman but her deposes an affidavit to the Hawks 
dealing with Mr Essa and Mr Koko.  So let us carry on, 
Chair.  The ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, of course, on that approach 
submitted to the Hawks is understood to be Ms Halima 
means Ms Halima submitted to the Hawks an affidavit 
deposed to by her.  It is just that, once they come here, we 
can hear more.  We can have clarification. 
MR KOKO:   There is enough ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR KOKO:   ...there is enough details to interact 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
And 
maybe 
you 
know 
enough 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   I understand ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am always the last one to know. 
MR KOKO:   There is enough detail to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 252 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   I am just – you said – I said I will listen to 
Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   And then we will come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   But you said I must raise these things as I 
carry ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that – yes, ja. 
MR KOKO:   I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you will do that.  Ja.  You see, you 
10 
need also to, in regard to this – well, in regard to 
everybody, supply Mr Seleka with as much, shall we call it 
“ammunition”, for what it is worth, for him to be able to 
question the witnesses in regard to what your version is 
before they are allowed to leave.  So.  And if you give him 
all the information that you have, you empower him to 
question them in terms of your version as well.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I see that it is two minutes... 
[laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   ...to six o’clock. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, let me ...[intervenes]  
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 253 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   We finish this part.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me draw ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   [Speaker unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me hear Mr Seleka first.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me just draw this to the 
Chairperson’s attention so that if we adjourn at least the 
Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:   ...before we adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Koko. 
MR KOKO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The affidavits that Ms Halima Alana 
submitted to the Hawks, we have it in the bundle.  It is 
page 1287.  Now I am listening to Mr Koko saying, you 
know, in regard to the statement, when Ms Suliman is 
saying:  I do not believe that ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...Alana had direct contact with Salim 
Essa, Mr Salim Essa.  That he seeks to make an issue of 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he says but she is contradicting 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 254 of 260 
 
herself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I am not sure whether that is 
correct because if you look at the affidavit Ms Alana made 
to the Hawks, she does not claim to have dealt directly 
with Mr Salim Essa.  You can see that she writes the 
affidavit purely based on what she says ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Please take me to that statement.  What is the 
number? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 1287, it is the same bundle. 
MR KOKO:   Chair, let us go back.  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   1287. 
MR KOKO:   1287. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, where she says: 
“I do hereby confirm that Travel Excellence 
has travel records for Anoj Singh and Matshela 
Moses Koko...” 
MR KOKO:   1287.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And on the face of it, she seems to 
testify ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Based on the records. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...based on the records. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 255 of 260 
 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
The 
person 
who 
claims 
to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Have personal knowledge. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...I should not say claim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The person who alleges to known 
Mr Salim Essa is Ms Suliman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that is the affidavit that we are 
dealing with. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MR KOKO:   Chair, I want to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So I said page ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   No, no, no. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   8, Bundle 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1286.  1286. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   1287. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It starts at 87. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is a fairly short affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I see that at paragraph 5 – at 12 – at 
page 1288 ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She says:  “I do hereby...” 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 256 of 260 
 
MR KOKO:   Please go to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Koko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At paragraph 5, I see she says: 
“I do hereby confirm that Travel Excellence 
has travel records for Anoj Singh and Matshela 
Moses Koko...” 
 
And then proceeds.  Where must I go to? 
MR KOKO:   1350. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1350? 
MR KOKO:   [Speaker unclear] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   1315? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Where is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is not in her affidavit or is that 
another affidavit? 
MR KOKO:   No, no the same bundle.  Same – Alana 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Give me the page number? 
MR KOKO:   1315. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One, three...? 
MR KOKO:   One, five. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One, five. 
MR KOKO:   Ja, it is in ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   But this is not in her affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, this ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   [Speaker unclear] 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 257 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a receipt.  Is that so? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is on the same...  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now what we – the distinction we are 
making Mr Koko.  It – the affidavit has annexures. 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I understand you are referring to 
an annexure to the affidavit? 
10 
MR KOKO:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   But we were looking for an allegation 
in her affidavit where she might be saying:  I know 
Mr Salim Essa or I know Mr Matshela Koko.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Or I have dealt with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so I have dealt ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think Mr Koko, by referring to this 
page, he is drawing attention to the fact that she signed 
this ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Exactly. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This receipt. 
MR KOKO:   That is exactly ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...of a hundred thousand rand that has 
got Essa as the person who sent EFT.  But it is okay.  This 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 258 of 260 
 
can be dealt with in due course, you know.  We do not 
need to ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...this ...[intervenes]  
MR KOKO:   This same receipt, we will get to it 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR KOKO:   ...quicker(?) and in the – Ms Suleiman’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR KOKO:   Because it is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, no, that is fine.  We will have a 
look but we ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   We are ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...on [Speaker unclear – parties 
intervening each other – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   Chair, can we finish this and then we can – at 
20 
least this part? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which part, Mr Koko? 
MR KOKO:   The one we are dealing with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   We have to move. 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 259 of 260 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]   
MR KOKO:   We are instructed.  I beg(?) you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay, Mr Koko.  You want the 
trips to be dealt with? 
MR KOKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or just this one? 
MR KOKO:   I need the trips to be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR KOKO:   I need the trips to be dealt with.  But let us 
10 
finish this one.  We started at least ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, the – you created a 
problem because you had something which could have 
waited until later but you wanted to deal with it now. 
MR KOKO:   I want to deal with it now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  You see.  But we cannot sit for 
too long. 
MR KOKO:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I will give you a chance to deal with 
it when we come back.  I will give you a chance.  Can I talk 
20 
to the Legal Teams in my chambers just now about – after 
we have adjourned about seeing whether in the next few 
days and next week there might be some evenings where 
we could continue?  But thank you, Mr Koko for availing 
yourself again.  Thank you to everybody.  Thank you to the 
04 MAY 2021 – DAY 388 
 
Page 260 of 260 
 
staff and the technicians.  Thank you to you Mr Seleka and 
your 
team, 
everybody. 
 
We 
are 
going 
to 
adjourn.  
Tomorrow, for the benefit of the public, I am supposed to 
hear the evidence of Mr Wakeford in relation to BOSASA. 
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 5 MAY 2021 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
