 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
06 MAY 2021 
 
 
DAY 390 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 318 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
06 MAY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 3 of 318 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 06 MAY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Notshe, good morning 
everybody.  Your mic is not on Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Good morning Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chairperson we are ready to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us just place on record Mr 
Wakeford’s legal representatives.  You can do it from where 
10 
you are if your mic is working. 
ADV WILLIS:  Good morning Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV WILLIS:   I confirm my appearance once again on 
behalf of Mr Wakeford. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chairperson we also have Mr Witz who is 
the representative of Mr Agrizzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC: Can he put himself on record Mr 
20 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes – yes ja please yes. 
ADV WITZ:  Yes morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV WITZ:   (Inaudible) 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 4 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank – thank you.  Thank you.  Okay I 
think then Mr Notshe for the benefit of the public you could 
just outline what Mr Wakeford’s evidence will – will cover 
then we can start. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair the genesis of 
Mr Wakeford’s appearance today is the evidence of Mr 
Angelo Agrizzi which he gave wherein he made references to 
the 
activities 
of 
Mr 
Wakeford 
so 
far 
as 
BOSASA 
is 
concerned. 
 
The three main issues Chair that are involved there is  
10 
1. Mr Agrizzi’s evidence was to the effect that when 
BOSASA had problems with SARS Mr Gavin – the late 
Mr Gavin Watson suggested that services of Mr 
Wakeford should be obtained so that he can assist 
BOSASA in that regard.   
2. Secondly there was the issue of the renewal of the 
contract of BOSASA with Home Affairs – Department of 
Home Affairs regarding the Lindela Repatriation Centre. 
Chair you will remember Lindela is – was a BOSASA was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think I do remember what Lindela 
20 
was ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  And then the – when they were – 
when they were negotiating their contract there it was then 
suggested that again Mr Wakeford should be – his services 
should be obtained and then he then got in contact with Mr 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 5 of 318 
 
Aniel Radhakrishna who was then working for a company 
who was charged by Home Affairs to negotiate with BOSASA.  
And then thirdly there was the issue of – still with the issue 
of SARS Mr Wakeford – the evidence of Mr Agrizzi that Mr 
Wakeford then brought in Mr Papadakis who was working for 
SARS and the purpose was that he would then assist 
BOSASA in problems with SARS. 
 
The evidence of Mr Agrizzi to the effect that all these 
people were paid Mr Wakeford was paid by BOSASA, Mr 
Papadakis was paid and also Mr Aniel Radhakrishna was 
10 
also paid by BOSASA. 
 
Chair you will see in the – in front of you there is a 
file.  The file is – is BOSASA Bundle 4 and it is Exhibit 33.  
In it Chair you will find what has happened – and then Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the files could not be an exhibit.  The 
exhibit should be Mr Wakeford’s affidavit or statement. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But this is the bundle, Bundle – 
BOSASA Bundle 4. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then Chair after Mr Agrizzi had 
testified Mr Wakeford then gave – applied to cross-examine 
Mr Agrizzi and then he brought an application supported by 
a founding affidavit. Mr Agrizzi answered to that and then 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 6 of 318 
 
Mr Wakeford replied to that.  And also Mr Vorster filed also 
the affidavit to which Mr Wakeford answered and there was 
a reply to that. 
 
This – they are also contained in this bundle that is 
in front of you.  Chair you will find then – then in the end in 
preparation for today’s hearings and Mr Wakeford filed an 
affidavit.  It was filed yesterday afternoon. The affidavit 
will – it will appear on item 12 of the bundle in front of you. 
 
Unhappily Chair the – there was a problem with 
printing the annexures to the item to the affidavit by our 
10 
office but the – the attorneys of Mr Wakeford had provided 
me with a hard copies of the affidavit and the annexures.  I 
have given the – the Chair ’s secretary that – so that in the 
meantime whilst we are waiting for the bundles to be put 
into the file we can go on with the printed copy.  Your 
secretary has them. 
 
At least that is where we are.  And then Chair I 
have also explained to Mr Wits that what is going to 
happen is we will proceed without the answer from Mr 
Agrizzi to this affidavit. 
20 
 
Then Mr Agrizzi is at liberty to file an answer 
thereto if he so wishes.  Mr Wits understands that.  He was 
also – I have also sent him the affidavit of Mr Wakeford the 
one that was filed yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay no that is fine.  That is fine.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 7 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then Mr Wakeford is here now to 
testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Please administer the oath.  Good 
morning Mr Wakeford. Good morning.  Please administer 
the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your names – please state your 
full names for the record. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Kevin Peter Edwin Wakeford. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:  No objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR WAKEFORD:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
MR WAKEFORD:    So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may be seated.  I just 
20 
want to say this for what it is worth.  As the commission 
tries to wrap up its work and with the time constraints that 
it has there may matters where by the time the commission 
wraps up its work where it feels that it has not had the 
benefit of all the evidence it might have wished to have or 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 8 of 318 
 
where further investigation may need to – may have 
needed to be done and in those circumstances it is 
possible that the commission may in its report not make 
any findings in regard to those matters on the basis that 
more investigation need to be done or more witnesses – 
certain witnesses maybe were not heard in which case it 
might leave it to law enforcement agencies to see whether 
they want to take certain matters further.   
So I am just mentioning that there is that possibility 
of 
that 
happening 
because 
of 
time 
constraints 
and 
10 
particularly in matters that fall outside what we have called 
public protector issues. 
 
The matters that we call public protector issues are 
the issues that the Public Protector had identified as the 
matters that should have – should be investigated by this 
commission. 
 
Now those matters are matters that are largely 
related to the Gupta’s and the former President.  But as 
some of you would know when the terms of reference of the 
commission were formulated by the former President they 
20 
went much wider than the issues that the Public Protector 
had identified as the issues that should be investigated by 
this commission. 
 
So as a result of that at the end of 2019 when I 
applied to the High Court for the extension of this 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 9 of 318 
 
commission’s time I indicated that from then on we would 
try and focus more on what I call the Public Protector 
issues because if one were to investigate all the matters 
that fall under the wide Terms of Reference we would take 
ten years or so.  
 
So – so I am just mentioning that it seems that we 
may have situations where in regard to some matters we 
have run out of time – we have not you know heard 
everybody or the investigations were not complete so we 
might have situations where I consider that it was not 
10 
appropriate to make any findings but maybe leave it to the 
law enforcement agencies if they think they want take 
whatever we have done further and investigate further. 
 
So I just thought I would mention that for the 
benefit of everybody.  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Mr Wakeford 
you would have made a number of affidavits.  You apply – 
when you applied to cross-examine Mr Agrizzi then Mr 
Agrizzi answered and replied.  There was an additional 
affidavit you replied thereto but the latest is the affidavit 
20 
that you filed yesterday.  That was filed on your behalf 
yesterday. 
 
Now in front of you there is a file and in that file if I 
can ask you to turn to what is marked as Item 12 and do 
you confirm that what you are – what appears there on – 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 10 of 318 
 
there is – if you look at the top of that page where at the 
top of the left – or the left top of the page – top - top of the 
page it is BOSASA 04852, you see that? 
MR WAKEFORD:  I confirm Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes that is where this affidavit begins 
and you will see below that there is content – there is a 
content page and on the other side then there is your – 
your full names.  Right.  Now before we go any further let 
us do some housekeeping.  When we refer to pages I say it 
is BOSASA 04852 I am referring to the black numbers and I 
10 
might not refer you to read the whole issue I might just 
refer to the number – I am referring the number. 
 
And then Chair we – Mr Wakeford has got his 
affidavit – the original – his affidavit that he had printed – 
he has made some marks on the affidavit and then I have 
indicated to him that we might do so that we can – it does 
not get lost he can refer us when he is referring to his 
affidavit to what is printed in his affidavit and then I will be 
able to direct it where it sits in the file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Mr Wakeford you heard me when I 
was addressing the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on one second Mr Notshe I am 
just trying to think whether that is not going to be 
confusing to those who read the transcripts later after the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 11 of 318 
 
commission has finished its work because ideally when you 
refer to a particular document the page number should be 
the same for everybody.  So – but I think you are doing 
that because you are still waiting for the annexures, is that 
right? 
MR WAKEFORD:  We are still waiting for the annexures 
but secondly Chair Mr Wakeford in his preparation he 
prepared on his own – on his own affidavit – the copy at 
home. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He did not prepare on this.  He has 
made marks on his own copy and he has marked it.  But 
what I was suggesting Chair is that in the instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not want – what I want is whether it 
is you or him when you say page so and so we must all be 
on the same page.  From what you are saying I got the 
impression that he might give a page but on mine it would 
be a different one or yours. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is what I am .. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  What I have guided him to do Chair is 
that I have guided him and told him that the – he will have 
the typed page on his document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But in the left hand corner of what – on 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 12 of 318 
 
our file is number – that number has got a page.  That is 
what then he might say to you Chair can I take you to page 
19 but BOSASA 8704 for the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I do not want to hear the other 
page that I do not have.  I want to hear only the one I 
have. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But there is no reason why he cannot do 
that.  Mr Wakeford because you would know what you have 
in terms of your own document but you would know what 
10 
page so you just tell us only the page that we also have.  
Is that alright? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes – yes Chair I will operate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it can be done. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is fine then.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Mr Wakeford the – you heard me 
when 
I 
summarised 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
– 
to 
the 
Chairperson why you are here and the issues that you are 
dealing with. 
 
Can you in your own words just respond to those 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 13 of 318 
 
issues that are before the commission and then we can 
then go to details about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually that – that – I think that is a 
good suggestion. It may well be that it might be quicker the 
way you suggesting.  So in effect if I understand correct – 
you correctly Mr Notshe and you must tell me if I 
misunderstood you what you would like is that on the 
topics which you have given Mr Wakeford can give his side 
of the story. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes,  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And finish and then you can then 
question him on the matters and it is the question of either 
we take one topic and he gives his side of the story, you 
question him, he finishes or whether he gives his side of 
the story on all the topics and thereafter you question him.  
Which one is the (talking over one another). 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair I would like it if he gives us the 
whole story. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The whole story. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes because then.. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine – that is fine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then – and then we go into details 
on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Of – of the affidavit. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 14 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So basically Mr Wakeford it is an 
opportunity 
to 
tell 
your 
story 
without 
questions 
and 
questions come later.  It might make things to go faster. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Thank you very much Chair.  Chair I 
think what I am going to do is to firstly give you my high 
level response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that is fine. 
MR WAKEFORD:  And then we can get into the meat of the 
10 
(talking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Into – okay.  That is fine. 
MR WAKEFORD:  If that is okay with you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  But I think it is always important for 
witnesses to speak to their understanding of things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  So my understanding is this Chair that 
there were a bunch of false allegations made against 
myself and I am sure many other people.   
20 
 
The one allegation and if I can refer you Chair 
because I am going to go to part of the – the document to 
page it says BOSASA 04902 – 902.  The top left hand 
number is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have – ja I have got it – I have got 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 15 of 318 
 
that. 
MR WAKEFORD:  So it says: 
“Allegations 
and 
mandate 
of 
the 
commission.” 
 
So the allegations and I am going to read this Chair 
because this is probably the nexus of what I think you need 
to hear in particular and the broader court of public 
opinion. 
 
The allegations made against me can only be 
assessed 
within 
the 
scope 
of 
the 
mandate 
of 
the 
10 
commission in order to establish whether I am implicated 
within the mandate as alleged or not. 
 
The mandate of the commission is to investigate 
allegations of state capture, corruption and fraud in the 
public sector including the organs of state. 
 
The allegations made against me by Agrizzi and 
Vorster have been fabricated and the facts twisted so as to 
suggest corruption and fraud in the public sector and to 
bring me within the mandate of the commission however 
there is no evidence to support these fabrications. 
20 
 
And Chair I think you will find within my pack I am 
probably certainly with regard to the BOSASA work stream 
one of the few witnesses who speaks to facts and 
substance with evidence backing it up. 
 
However there is no support – no evidence to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 16 of 318 
 
support these fabrications.  On a correct assessment of the 
allegations the main issues in dispute in respect of the 
allegations made against me and within the mandate of the 
commission are correctly identified as 
1. When Mr George Papadakis I will refer to him as 
Papadakis in future resolved a major tax investigation 
at SARS between the 10 t h of March 2008 when 
Papadakis was first employed at SARS and the 26 t h of 
February 2009 when the first order of cement alleged 
to have been placed with WG Wearne for delivery to 
10 
Meyersdal Eco Estate.   
ADV WILLIS:  Sorry Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:  I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:  For interrupting Mr Wakeford I am following 
him in the affidavit but he – I heard the first word that he 
read wrong which changes the context.  The first word was 
whether. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
ADV WILLIS:  So it poses the question.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV WILLIS:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  You got that Mr Wakeford? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Thank you Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 17 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Whether I influence the Department of 
Home Affairs to extend the initial Lindela contract between 
BOSASA and the Department of Home Affairs which I will 
refer to as DHA beyond the tenure period ending the 31 s t of 
October 2015 or extend other financial benefits embodied 
in the addendums relative to the initial contract. 
 
The second issue – the secondary issues in dispute 
Chair can be summarised as 
1. Whether payments of R100 000.00 per month were 
10 
paid to me as a fee for providing service in relation to 
the particular SARS investigation that Papadakis is 
alleged to have resolved at SARS between the 10 t h of 
March 2008 and the 26 t h of February 2009 or as 
catch-up payments of my monthly consultancy fee of 
R50 000.00 including VAT as I say they were. 
And then the second one. 
2. Whether cement to the value of R600 000.00 was 
provided by BOSASA to Papadakis in exchange for 
him influencing the alleged major SARS investigation 
20 
in between the 10 t h of March 2008 and the 26 t h of 
February 2009. 
3. Whether 
payments 
were 
made 
by 
BOSASA 
to 
Radhakrishna in exchange for him awarding BOSASA 
with a five-year extension to the initial Lindela 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 18 of 318 
 
contract. 
And Chair let me just explain the initial Lindela 
contract was in 2005 before my time at Home Affairs as the 
Minister ’s Project Turnaround Advisor and before Aniel 
Radhakrishna had arrived.  So it was a good two years 
before that had happened. 
 
Based 
on 
the 
evidence 
in 
the 
commission’s 
possession the main issues in dispute can immediately be 
dispensed with on the basis of the following: 
 
Sorry Chair my mouth is getting dry.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  That is fine. 
MR 
WAKEFORD: 
 
Based 
on 
the 
evidence 
in 
the 
commission’s possession the main issues in dispute can be 
immediately dispensed with and Chair I think you will find 
this interesting. 
1. Papadakis could never have assisted BOSASA in 
resolving any major investigation at SARS before the 
26 t h of February 2009 as it is common cause between 
all parties that no SARS investigation existed before 
the 23 r d of March 2011 with the first notification of an 
20 
impending audit being made on the 18 t h of August 
2010 thus the first SARS investigation into BOSASA 
commenced two years subsequent to this February 
2009 timeframe. 
2. No five-year extension to the 2005 Lindela contract 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 19 of 318 
 
between BOSASA and the DHA was awarded to 
BOSASA within the second and third addendums to the 
contract while me and or Radhakrishna were affiliated 
with the DHA.  No other financial benefits to BOSASA 
appear within the second and third addendums to the 
original Lindela contract. 
So Chair the important point is 2 – 202.2.  No five year 
extension to the 2005 Lindela contract between BOSASA 
and the DHA was awarded at all and we have the evidence 
and the contract addendums to prove that. 
10 
We also have done some number crunching to prove 
that in fact a lot of money was saved for the fiscus post the 
turnaround intervention. 
The 
secondary 
issues 
Chair 
in 
dispute 
can 
immediately be dispensed with on the basis of the following. 
1. My banking records, BOSASA financial records and 
email records between myself and Agrizzi all confirm 
that I was employed as a consultant to BOSASA from 
2006 to April 2015 on a monthly retainer of R57 000.00 
including VAT or R50 000.00 excluding VAT. This 
20 
amount never changed.  The only occasions on which I 
was paid R100 000.00 per month for – were – when I 
had not been paid my retainer in previous months.  It 
is for these reasons that the average of my receipts 
from BOSASA for the 107-month period was only 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 20 of 318 
 
R58 461.57 as an average. 
2. Papadakis could not have received cement in 2009 as 
compensation 
for 
influencing 
a 
major 
SARS 
investigation as no SARS investigation occurred over 
this period and indeed the first audit conducted only 
commenced two years later in 2011. 
And Chair I think the investigators of the commission 
have done a very good job in assembling a lot of the 
evidence for us which speaks to exactly when cement was 
delivered. 
10 
 
I remain silent in previous affidavit because I was 
advised by Advocate Willis to do so because Mr Papadakis 
had not responded and he did not believe it was necessary 
to cooperate with this commission as – whereas my view is I 
had to cooperate and we had to get to the bottom of this. 
 
I 
could 
not 
have 
facilitated 
any 
payments 
to 
Radhakrishna in return for awarding a five-year extension to 
the Lindela contract when verifiably no such extension was 
ever awarded. 
 
So Chair – 
20 
ADV WILLIS:  Sorry Mr Chair could I again interrupt at that 
juncture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:  It is necessary with your leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 21 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:  Mr Chair Mr Wakeford has referred to both 
Mr Radhakrishna and Mr Papadakis he just referred to the 
fact that we awaited particularly Mr Papadakis’ version 
which was promised to us as Mr Notshe will confirm some 
time ago – late – this – the last half of last year in fact.  
We received as was submitted to you yesterday informed – 
you were informed by Mr Notshe we received the affidavits 
of Mr Papadakis, Mr Radhakrishna for the first time as well 
as 
Mr 
Agrizzi’s 
response 
to 
the 
affidavit 
of 
Mr 
Radhakrishna yesterday morning for the first time.  They 
10 
had not been worked into these affidavits but they will be 
before you and I hope you will have regard to them but 
they are both very powerful affidavits which entirely 
support what Mr Wakeford will testify to you today we are 
not going to be making oh he will not be making much 
reference to them because of the time constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:    Chair just on that never mind any 
20 
wrong impression be created the affidavits were not made 
available 
to 
Mr 
Wakeford’s 
attorneys 
because 
the 
investigators were awaiting the response of Mr Agrizzi to 
those two affidavits.  We finally we got the response of Mr 
Agrizzi hence then we gave them the affidavits at this 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 22 of 318 
 
stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV WILLIS:  Yes indeed so Mr Chair that I should have 
maybe indicated to Mr Notshe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   So there is no blame imputed to the 
Commission, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may continue, sir. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair what I have done is.  I have 
spoken to what I believe is the nexus of everything that I 
10 
am going to say today but merely to unpack it more and to 
– some consultants would refer to it as a deep dive and to 
have a good look at everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And I am happy to be stopped at any 
stage, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   If you feel ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And Chair I am going to attempt not to 
20 
ramble on.  So I am going right back to the beginning of 
this affidavit which starts on page 85 – BOSASA 04852 but 
I – Chair, with your permission.  I am going to dispense 
with the formalities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 23 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   What I deposed to, the introduction... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Because I have spoken to a lot of that 
already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And even in the denial.  Chair, just to 
say that for the record I deny what has been said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Then I move on Chair.  I am not going to 
go into the prologue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Purely because, I think as we get into 
the meat of it, a lot of the substance there would be 
covered and I do not want to whinge and whine about my 
Rule 3 rights that had been abused. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Because we are all adults and we all 
have to sometimes – I think Advocate Pretorius referred to 
20 
as there is always collateral damage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   But in the interest of the nation Chair 
and the truth, I would like to start on – I will give you the 
exact page number Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 24 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m?  Mr Notshe, you must remember 
when Mr Wakeford has finished before you start your 
questions that we should have his affidavit admitted as an 
exhibit.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  You may continue. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for the record. 
MR WAKEFORD:   At page – BOSASA 04865 and it refers 
to the - my relationship with Gavin Watson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So – the late Gavin Watson, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So I start off.  Chair, just to qualify 
something 
because 
my 
primary 
relationship 
with 
the 
Watson family was with Ronnie and Valence Watson.  In 
fact, Chair I met them as a youngster.  I was a student at 
the University of Port Elizabeth in the mid-80’s.  I was 
recruited into an ANC underground cell, a structure that 
ultimately 
reported 
into 
Mpom-swaye-poliso(?) 
20 
[phonetically] and I was rigorously schooled in the politics 
of the underground at that time.   
 
And of course, as you would know Chair, being – 
as the Xhosa [speaking vernacular].  It is not very easy at 
times 
to 
operate 
within 
a 
society 
that 
was 
heavily 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 25 of 318 
 
brainwashed in particular against the Watson family.  And 
you will remember Chair their house was burnt down, their 
businesses went bankrupt, their bank – the banks pulled 
the loans and required them to pay back and of course it 
was a disaster for the family.   
 
But during that time, Chair, let me say that and I 
am speaking off the script but let me say that as a family 
one could never question their commitment to the struggle 
and democracy and non-racialism and the huge abuse that 
the family suffered both at the hands of fellow white 
10 
citizens and at the hands of the state.   
 
I 
remember 
them 
clothing 
and 
resourcing 
youngsters who were leaving the country just after the 76 
rights and onward.  They owned clothing shops, they 
provided shoes, clothing and usually a bit of money to get 
out of the country for certain ANC recruits.  I do also 
remember taking them through Chair as a family because 
they had literally ran out of...   
 
So during the period Chair, 1999 to 2002 I was 
the Chief Executive of the SA Chamber of Business and 
20 
during that time Chair, you will also remember, I am sure, 
because I am sure you know Judge Myburgh, I was a 
whistle-blower in the rapid depreciation of our currency.  I 
had received information from a source whom I never 
disclosed and I never will.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 26 of 318 
 
 
But you will remember that as a consequence of 
that whistle-blowing activity, my life took a very different 
turn and as Cees Bruggemans of FNB said on Moneyweb 
Radio, he said:  Wakeford is now unemployed.  So it was 
as a result of that action and maybe one day around a fire 
we can talk about those things if I ever have that privilege 
of meeting you personally, but I will not extrapolate on that 
now but just to say this that I had to become a consultant 
because I would never had survived and my harmony(?) 
would never have survived.   
10 
 
And one of the consultancies that I did get and 
in fact was as a result of an intervention of Valence 
Watson who spoke to Gavin Watson and said:  Surely, you 
can make use of the former SACOP’s CEO.  Surely, he can 
add some value to your business.  And that is when I was 
contracted mid-2006 to provide consultancy services which 
were varied and I am sure if you read the body of the 
evidence ranging from business opportunities submitted 
through to political economic analyses but really looking at 
the threats that the business was encountering.   
20 
 
Chair, let me just quickly give you an overall 
picture of BOSASA because it is unfortunately in my view it 
became the victim of a witch hunt and it started long 
before the Zondo Commission.  And during that time Chair 
it, in my view, was probably at a practitioner level.  It was 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 27 of 318 
 
a company that led the pack in terms of understanding the 
essence of black economic empowerment and bringing 
dignity to people.   
 
So it was a company in terms of its balance 
scorecard, top performer level one.  And I heard the 
counter discussions around that but the truth is, if you 
went there everyone was proud of what they were doing.  It 
was managed essentially with the acceptance of what I call 
the fifth column or a few Whitley’s.   
 
It was managed, as many people would say by 
10 
[speaking vernacular].  And its board was black with the 
exception of Gavin Watson.  The shareholding was 70/75% 
black.  The staffing throughout from bottom to top was 
black, African and it was not about nominal jobs either.  It 
was about people becoming heavily involved in the day to 
day economic activities of that company.   
 
And yes they want some state contracts but to 
say and I find it absolutely absurd, some people in the 
press claiming that billions of rands of contracts.  The truth 
is that if you had to take Bidvest as an example Chair and I 
20 
am not targeting Bidvest but Bidvest was a mainstream 
company with I am sure a lot of white managed but they 
masses state contract and they still do to this day, from 
gardening 
right 
through 
to 
security, 
to 
catering, 
to 
logistics, huge state contracts.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 28 of 318 
 
 
I am sure BOSASA would be a little pimple in 
terms of what Bidvest had in the broader political economy 
and I am sure that I can refer to other examples as well but 
for the sake of time, I will not.  But to say Chair that I 
believe this company and that is what motivated me as a 
person and as a professional to see where we were under 
threat.   
 
But why were we at threat?  We were at threat, 
and I say we because I was merely a part-time consultant 
but I had other clients.  But I stuck with them without an 
10 
increase for nine years, I stuck with them because I 
believed in their vision otherwise I would have walked 
away.  And the vision was putting to practise and the vision 
was empowerment cannot be about passive shareholding 
by African people.   
 
Empowerment has got to be about the workforce 
having a share and about black ownership who at least 
black control of the company and that is what it did have.  
Chair, I met a youngster the other day who was Facilities 
Manager at the Krugersdorp Campus, the HQ of BOSASA 
20 
and he recognised me at a hotel in Houghton.  He was the 
Facilities Manager, today is a waiter.   
 
It gives you an idea of what Gavin Watson and 
others did to uplift people.  He took youngsters out of the 
juvenile criminal programme and brought them eventually 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 29 of 318 
 
before judges and had them exonerated or give them some 
form of relieve and employed them Chair.  Employed them.  
And they became leaders within the organisation.   
 
So you know this picture painted of the Watson’s 
generally and of Gavin in particular is not true.  And I must 
say this because I believe at some stage there will be a 
more balanced view in our societies but the Watson’s give 
white people credibility and legitimacy in this country.  If it 
were not for people like that and I am sure there are others 
and one can name them, Neil Argot, Joe Slovo.   
10 
 
One can go on and on but the point is, it is those 
people 
who 
played 
township 
rugby 
and 
then 
built 
companies that were empowered and that treated black 
people 
as 
equals 
not 
as 
economic 
slaves, 
not 
as 
subordinates.  It is people like that that we should treasure 
and give national awards to not treat them like they have 
sold out the bagging(?) system of the freedom chart.  They 
have not.   
 
So Chair, if I could then leap into my relationship 
with Agrizzi because it gives context and that is – it starts 
20 
on page 04866.  Chair, my relationship with this man was 
ten years and unproductive from the very start.  My 
appointment has been suggested – had been suggested 
directly by Gavin Watson and by the Watson family in 2006 
due to his personal experience with me which I believed 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 30 of 318 
 
angered Agrizzi as he saw anyone who had a direct 
relationship with Watson as a threat to Agrizzi’s own 
relationship with Watson and control of the business and I 
will talk about control of the business just now Chair.   
 
Sometime after meeting Agrizzi I expressed to 
Watson my concerns about Agrizzi’s character and attitude.  
BOSASA was a growing black economic empowerment 
business which could be become a benchmark for how 
black 
economic 
empowerment 
principles 
could 
be 
successfully implemented.  Agrizzi, on the other hand, 
10 
appeared to view economic inclusion and Afrocentricity as 
a burden rather than a necessity.   
 
I remember going to – and I am not going to read 
this direct – I remember going to the Silverstar Casino 
Conference Centre in my early days as a consultant.  I had 
to speak about corporate governance and my experience at 
the commission into rapid depreciation of the rand, et 
cetera, and Agrizzi came to me afterwards and said to me, 
and I cannot remember his exact words but that he did not 
really believe that or have confidence in black management 
20 
or leadership in spite of trying to put portray himself as 
otherwise to Watson and the board of directors at the time.   
 
And let me also say, he ingratiated himself to 
such an extent that my relationship with Watson was 
tenuous as well because I challenged him on a number of 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 31 of 318 
 
matters and his accused was:  Oh, it is the rainbow nation.  
Now, Kevin, everyone – you got to give everyone a chance 
to transform.  Strangely enough Chair, he admitted to you 
in oral evidence that – he said:  Chair, I am a racist.  But 
he concealed it for a long time.  For a long time.   
 
Strangely enough, Agrizzi in his affidavit to the 
Commission on 8 t h of April 2019 denied my claims as to his 
racism in an attempt to reposition, and that is interesting.   
Chair, when you see my founding affidavit, my response to 
his allegations and then all of a sudden he must have had 
10 
an opportunity to read it but his story changed significantly 
and in his second affidavit in relation to the evidence, the 
timeframes and in relation to some of the things that he 
admitted to in this Commission including racism.   
 
He says in his second affidavit which is not in 
the public domain: 
“I was one of the persons who implemented 
and managed a diverse multi-cultural balance 
of competent black management and staff in 
my role at BOSASA. 
20 
In fact, not only assisted in black management 
and leadership but I devoted many years in not 
only 
training 
but 
assisting 
the 
competent 
individuals that were employed...” 
 
On the 2 n d of September, Chair, 2018, however, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 32 of 318 
 
City Press had published a 23-minute recording of Agrizzi 
on their website, the authenticity of which they had 
verified.  Short excerpts of this recording were played 
during Agrizzi’s evidence before this Commission.  Agrizzi 
attempted to suggest that the excerpts of the recording 
were not indicative of the whole recording which Advocate 
Pretorius 
said 
was 
not 
in 
the 
possession 
of 
the 
Commission at the time.   
 
I had, therefore, provided a transcription of the 
full 23-minute recording in my bundle Chair and I am sure 
10 
you will have a copy soon under EA-18 and tender(?) 
providing the Commission with the authenticated recording 
itself.  So Chair, if it is required, one of my team have it for 
you.  In the recording which was made by Agrizzi at his 
home on the 24 t h of August 2018 he said about black 
people and Africans, Chair. 
“They 
steal, 
they 
loot, 
they 
rape, 
they 
destroy...”  
 
In reference to the black community collectively.  
Agrizzi then referred a friend – to a friend of his, Romano, 
20 
saying that he was not a racist, he is a realist for his view 
on black economic empowerment that he would not led a 
bleddie K****r.  K*-word Chair, run his business.  This 
confirmed 
Agrizzi’s 
own 
view 
on 
black 
economic 
empowerment Chair.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 33 of 318 
 
 
This is in stark contrast to what Agrizzi said at 
the Commission on the 16 t h of January 2019 when Agrizzi 
said: 
“The country was changing for the better and 
we saw that BEE credentials played a major 
role...” 
 
Chair, in the same recording of Agrizzi on the 
21 s t of August 2018, Agrizzi says, one, referred to the 
black directors of BOSASA as monkeys, by referring to 
black director, Trevor Mathenjwa as his pet monkey, 
10 
Romeo.   
 
And Chair, you – when you see the evidence 
later, you will also see that he has a monkey at home that 
he calls Romeo.  Two, referred to the black directors of 
BOSASA as dysfunctional.  Three: 
“I will personally go into that company with or 
without permission and I will F*** each of 
those K****’s* out of there...”   
 
Referring to the black directors of the company.  
Stated that:   
20 
“That K****r needs a good hiding...”   
 
Referring to respected attorney, Peter Tshiseve.   
 
And stated:   
““I will teach each one of those K****’s* where 
to get off...”   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 34 of 318 
 
 
Once again referring to the black directors of the 
company.  And six, stated that the black directors of the 
company were not competent.  It is clearly a lie by Agrizzi 
to suggest to the Commission and his representation to it 
on the 8 t h of April 2019 that he is not a racist and that his 
belief is that these very same people he referred to as 
monkeys, dysfunctional, rapist, thieves and looters are 
suddenly a competent black management and staff in his 
view and that he, in fact, worked very well and had a good 
relationship with the black directors.   
10 
 
Indeed, there could be no greater proof of 
Agrizzi 
purge-ring 
himself 
in 
his 
affidavit 
to 
the 
Commission on the 8 t h of April 2019 by denying my claims 
as to his racism than Agrizzi specifically stating to 
Chairman on the 29 t h of January 2019 in his oral evidence:  
“Chair, I am a racist.”  So Chair, the other thing and I am 
not going to talk to script now.   
 
The – but the same page, the other thing that I 
think is very important for the – is that this man was the 
day facto CEO of the company.  He had 
built an 
20 
institutional mode of control around Gavin Watson.  He 
even referred to and responded at – certainly at that point 
in time to Gavin Watson’s emails.   
 
There are board-resolutions which you will see 
in the evidence where – even in terms of some of these 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 35 of 318 
 
criminal activities where Henning van Tonder, the CFO, 
were – the sole(?) – that they were the guys who signed 
almost everything and they were empowered to by the 
board in terms – although there were other people who 
could have signed, there was a list of people, they were 
the two signatories in the main.   
 
I am dealing with the banks, to dealing with 
issues of finance, to dealing with issues of procurement 
approvals and signing off payments.  Gavin Watson, as we 
all know, was not a detailed man.  In a charismatic figure, 
10 
someone who loved the people, spent time at the youth 
centres with, you know, juvenile delinquents.   
 
He just loved people and he managed by walking 
around.  He did not have a desk or an office and he very 
rarely used a computer.  Agrizzi was the CEO here Chair.  
As much as he denies it and there is evidence to back it up 
but he was not called the CEO, he was called the Chief 
Operating Officer and it is my view that if anything went 
wrong that he was inexplicable part of what went wrong at 
BOSASA.   
20 
 
And I warned Gavin Watson about him on several 
occasions to say this man is up to something because I 
would bring opportunities for the company, none of them 
were considered.  Not one.  You cannot tell me every 
single opportunity was not a strong business case.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 36 of 318 
 
 
Chair, onto the next page.  Agrizzi actually says 
he denies.  He says:   
“I deny that I controlled Gavin Watson’s email 
account and that only emails that I received 
from Kevin Wakeford, I had given examples of 
the same which had been attached hereto...” 
 
But Chair if you look at a lot of the evidence that 
can be considered here, certainly in my pack and I do refer 
to where one should go in terms of the references, it is 
very, very clear that there is proof where he even responds 
10 
in one email to say: 
“Do not bother about emailing Gavin because I 
am responding to it anyway...” 
 
He actually says it.  Sir or Chair, you will also 
know and I am sure you have read my prior affidavits but 
there is sufficient evidence to prove that - and the 
investigators even had sight of my bank details but – 
where he says I was paid a hundred thousand.  The 
evidence speaks to a very different scenario.  Firstly, way 
outside 
of 
the 
timeframe 
of 
the 
so-called 
SARS 
20 
Investigation and secondly, Chair, those payments are 
proven captured payments where he, to frustrate me, 
deliberately did not pay me for months at times Chair.   
 
But because of my commitment in particular to 
the family and what they believed in, I continued to assist 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 37 of 318 
 
and then – and if one looks at the 741 – the Section 7- 417 
minutes where him and Van Tonder contradict everything, 
and Foster, that they said in front of you.  Everything is 
contradicted.   
 
They have purge-red themselves Chair.  They 
have committed a criminal act and those – both those 
activities, the one took place in front of you as a judge and 
the other took front – took place in front of Judge Joffe 
who was the Commissioner at the Section 417.  So Chair, I 
am 
worried 
about 
your 
time. 
 
So 
I 
am 
trying 
to 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Are you okay with the way I am doing it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we just wanted you – you were 
going to give an overview ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...over the high-level and then let 
Mr Notshe ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...directed questions to you in regard to 
20 
more details.  Do you need another, what, 15-minutes or 
how do you feel? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Oh, Chair.  No, I would need more than 
5-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 38 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   I would need more than 15-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay how much time do you need? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I think if you could give me an 
hour, hour and a half. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you will have completed? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let us see how – where you are 
by quarter past eleven ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...when 
we 
take 
the 
tea 
break.  
10 
Preferable when we come back maybe we could look at 
questions because you would still be able to deal with 
other issues. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Notshe, is that fine with you? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am happy with that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Counsel for Mr Wakeford, do you 
think that is fine? 
ADV REG WILLIS:   ...Mr Wakeford could - may need a 
little bit more time but you are – Mr Chairman, you are 
20 
correct.  Let us see how it goes.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV REG WILLIS:   Chairman, can I just take the 
opportunity of – because you do not have the bundle of 
annexure before you ...[intervenes]  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 39 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   Mr Wakeford is not referring to it but 
because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Later on. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   ...if you cannot see it, everything he is 
speaking to is referenced with annexures and there is 
about 330 odd pages ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   ...of evidence ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV REG WILLIS:   ...that he is not speaking directly to 
because of time constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I am seeing what I can skip if I 
can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on.  I think the evidence leader is 
disturbing everybody with the gestures but he was trying to 
arrange for water for you Mr Wakeford. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   Oh.  It is very kind ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The Commission staff will make sure 
that he has got water. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, sir.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 40 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay.  In his affidavit to the Commission 
on the 8 t h of April 2019, he said: 
“I did not have a bad working relationship with 
Kevin Wakeford. 
There was no [word cut] between us.  It was the 
dire situation of Kevin Wakeford’s financial system.” 
And that there was one financial hiccup in my system, 
Chair, and that was it and that I prove and I provide you 
with the evidence.   
“The 
Commission’s 
investigators 
had 
however 
10 
confronted Agrizzi with an email dated the 7 March 
2012 where he says: 
“Carlos, this was done as agree when I reduced 
Kevin Wakeford…” 
Talking to the amount I received.  
“…for March and R50 000 for Feb.  We are well 
behind it but I will manage expectations on his side.  
The consultant is using the attached vehicle to 
channel payments.” 
And I am not exactly sure but clearly he reduced – he was 
20 
the person who was adjusting and playing the fool with my 
payments, Chair.   
“When asked for comment I was informed by the 
Commission that Agrizzi responded during this 
period the company was under cash flow pressure 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 41 of 318 
 
and Mr Gavin Watson instructed me not to make 
further payments to Kevin Wakeford.”  
 
So, Chair, if you go to page – BOSASA 04/873, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   It refers to the Section 417 transcripts 
where Advocate Lourens is questioning Van Tonder the 
former CFO of BOSASA.   
ADV WITZ:   Sorry, Chair, if I can make a submission in 
this regard? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WITZ:   My understanding is – sorry, Chair, I have just 
been told just to move so you can hear me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is fine. 
ADV WITZ:   If I can just make a submission at this stage 
with the utmost of respect, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   The second 417 inquiry which is held before 
the learned retired Judge Joffe at the offices of MacRobert 
Adams, was a secret inquiry.  In terms of that secret 
20 
inquiry, I am not sure how Mr Wakeford and his legal team 
are now in possession of what is supposed to be a secret 
inquiry.  That is the whole purpose of the Companies Act.  
So reference to this, in order to try and substantiate the 
whole promotion that Mr Wakeford, with respect, is giving 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 42 of 318 
 
of the late Watson family and all their BEE credentials and 
what they did and now using secrete inquiry documents 
which should not be before this Commission or in the 
public because the learned judge on many occasions in 
that matter made it clear that it is a secret inquiry and 
those documents cannot be released to anybody.  So I am 
now sure how they have come into possession, perhaps my 
learned friend who appears on behalf of Mr Wakeford can 
explain how they have come into possession of secret 
inquiry documents and I think the slant that Mr Wakeford, 
10 
with respect, is trying to put on this in order to bolster 
and try and promote his relationship, his university days, 
the whole scenario that he has given might have a 
serious impact in regards to the effect of his evidence.  
So if we could just deal with that aspect and I would like 
to just raise that at this stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WITZ:   Because on many occasions in that inquiry I 
was present the learned judge made it clear that – and he 
put it on record before we started, it is a secret inquiry, 
20 
there were only one or two people that were privy to it and 
none of this can be put in the public domain.  That is the 
very purpose of Section 417, so if we can just deal with 
that and get some clarify as to how this is now in the 
public domain from what his – then it defeats the whole 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 43 of 318 
 
purpose of Section 417. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WITZ:   So if we could just deal with that, with 
respect.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Would you like to respond? 
MR WAKEFORD:   As you please, Mr Chairman.  Chair, 
indeed we have put up extracts, a number of extracts, I 
think seven or eight, that come from the 417 transcript.  In 
each instance we put them up because they show Mr 
Agrizzi and Mr Vorster to have perjured themselves and 
10 
lied under oath before Judge Joffe, is – there are extracts 
in relation to evidence by Mr van Tonder who in fact 
supports the proper understanding of his evidence, Mr 
Wakeford’s evidence.  We asked the Commission to obtain 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am sorry, that is the – you are 
dealing with the purpose of referring to it.  I think counsel 
for Mr Agrizzi raises the legality of putting it in the public 
domain and …[intervenes] 
ADV WITZ:   Indeed so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is the issue he is raising.   
ADV WITZ:   Indeed so, Mr Chairman, that is the relevance 
of the information, firstly.  We first approached the 
Commission last year in October, asked them to obtain a 
copy of the transcript and we placed that relevance before 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 44 of 318 
 
the Commission, the secretariat.  Of course we did so 
because this Commission has powers to obtain that 
transcript.  We obtained no response.  There may have 
been one response, Mr Notshe said to me yesterday that 
he believed that there had been a writing to say that we 
should 
obtain 
it 
ourselves. 
 
I 
look 
through 
the 
correspondence, I did not find that but certainly from Mr 
Notshe’s side he believed he had dealt with the issue.  Of 
course from ours it had not been dealt with. 
 
We followed up in a number of written items both to 
10 
the Commission and directly to yourself asking for a 
meeting to sort these things out and obtaining the – there 
were 
other 
documents, 
obtaining 
in 
particular 
this 
transcript because of its relevance. 
 
In the meantime we tried to obtain that document 
ourselves through the Master ’s office, the Hawks tried to 
obtain a copy of that document too, we know, and for 
whatever reason, it was not forthcoming. 
 
What the person who has given that document to us 
is Mr Jared Watson.  He is the nephew of Mr Gavin 
20 
Watson, he is also the representative of the shareholders 
in BOSASA liquidation.  He, as of right, is entitled to the 
transcript and obtained that transcript.  He informed our 
client 
who 
informed 
us 
that 
there 
were 
these 
contradictions. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 45 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That..? 
ADV WITZ:   There were these contradictions, these 
perjurious[sic] 
contradictions 
that 
I 
have 
referred 
to 
initially and the support by Mr van Tonder or the support of 
his evidence, should I say.  And he was not willing to 
surrender the documentation to us to place or the extracts 
to place in the public domain.  He wanted us to obtain the 
– not the permission, but a subpoena.   
You will recall that this issue came before you 
yesterday 
and 
your 
attitude 
was 
that 
under 
the 
10 
circumstances of pressure with us adjourning yesterday 
you were not at that stage prepared to issue a subpoena.  
When we retired from here, Chairman, we went back to my 
chambers and there I asked – I called for Mr Watson to 
attend at my chambers and out of Mr Wakeford’s respect 
for him, he asked him one more time to consider his 
position. 
 
We took the position that notwithstanding previous 
advice he had taken or his own belief and understanding 
that there is no real reason for him and that he is not 
20 
properly prohibited, he is not actually prohibited on a 
proper understanding of Section 417.  I mean, the law in 
relation thereto, he is not actually prohibited from giving it 
to us.  In fact anybody can use it in criminal and civil 
proceedings and I say that subject to the qualifications that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 46 of 318 
 
are contained in Section 417 and a commentary in the 
various authorities that deal with it and without prevailing – 
without 
pressurising 
him, 
we 
did 
prevail 
on 
him 
to 
reconsider.  He left us for a number of hours and he went 
and consulted his attorneys and whoever else and took 
advice.   
 
He came back to us and he made the election to 
then allow us to publish it and that is why you find it in this 
format in the affidavit notwithstanding us not obtaining a 
subpoena from yourself.  The nub of the – sorry, might I 
10 
just take an instruction? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   What had been taking place behind the 
scenes was an effort – an attempt to get through the right 
channels within the Master ’s office and I am going to read 
to you that we have just received that permission from the 
Master ’s office.   
So as I sit now before you and as I lift this phone 
and give you my assurance as counsel in this matter, on 
my instruction, as I have not read it, this is the authority by 
20 
the Master ’s office.  But the nub of the matter where we 
not to have received this, the nub of our view is that the 
Commissioner in a 417 inquiry does not have power to 
either prohibit or to entitle anybody to use it and publish it.  
Whatever portions and warnings were given by Judge Joffe 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 47 of 318 
 
and the Commission, no doubt were given pursuant to 
Section 417 and obviously general understandings of 417, 
etcetera.   
 
However, we hold the view that some of those 
understandings are sometimes misconstrued.  I am not 
saying that Judge Joffe misconstrues them but certainly 
other persons often do.  It is the Master who holds the 
power to order.   
Yes, sometimes that can be and in many instances 
specific powers are delegated to Commissioners, such as 
10 
Judge Joffe, but there was no real prohibition in our view.  
We asked Mr Watson to go and have that considered by his 
legal representatives, it was, he came back, I do not know 
what advice they gave him, I did not want to know that.   
But, 
nonetheless, 
an 
urgent 
letter 
was 
again 
dispatched yesterday and delivered to the Master ’s office.  
Yesterday both the Master and the assistant Master were 
not available, either.  And we can place this before you as 
soon as we can have it printed up.   
We 
now 
have 
the 
permission 
of 
the 
Master.  
20 
Nonetheless, the matter is, in our submission, now moot.  
Thank you, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously both Mr Notshe and counsel 
for Mr Agrizzi would need to see the permission but I think 
that it may be that it might be better that we do not – that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 48 of 318 
 
Mr Wakeford does not refer to these extracts for now.  
Maybe later until I am also satisfied that it is in order to do 
so but also until counsel for Mr Agrizzi has looked at the 
permission and reflected and Mr Notshe.  So I suggest that 
Mr Wakeford skips this part for now and then we can look 
at later in the day. 
ADV WITZ:   Might I just – thank you, Mr Chairman, with 
your leave might I just say that there is an introductory 
paragraph that deals with the fact that he has been reliably 
informed with the briefest of summary and then he can stop 
10 
at that point.  If I could suggest that, for his ears, and then 
not quote from the quotations which are set out and of 
course the extracts are attached but he will not quote from 
it.  Thank you, as you please, Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the one at – is that paragraph 84 
that you are talking about?  
“However, I am informed…” 
ADV WITZ:   Chairman, if I could just get there. 
“However, 
I 
am 
informed 
that 
Agrizzi’s 
accomplice…” 
20 
Etcetera, etcetera.  So he would read that paragraph, then 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what I would prefer is that let him 
not read it now, let him – if later on I say no, he can go 
ahead and read the extracts then he can introduce the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 49 of 318 
 
extracts by first reading it at a later stage. 
ADV WITZ:  Mr Chair, if I could just with your leave please 
prevail on you and also test my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   In the next paragraph 85 is the actual extract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WITZ:   84, to which I have alluded is merely the 
briefest of summary in which he says: 
“However, I informed…” 
And he is entitled to place that evidence before you as 
10 
what he is informed in the briefest of terms.  He is then not 
place the extract before you.  I would, with your leave, 
prevail on you to allow to read the paragraphs before but 
not the paragraphs with the extracts.  As you please, Mr 
Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, my difficulty with that is that I must 
just look at the relevant provisions first, you know, even 
with the summary, it is better that I look at the relevant 
provisions.  You have indicated that the Master must give 
permission. 
20 
ADV WITZ:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not the Commissioner at the 417 
Inquiry.  Counsel for Mr Agrizzi seemed to proceed on the 
basis either that the statue does not allow it or the once 
the Commissioner has said it is secret that should be the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 50 of 318 
 
position.  So before Mr Wakeford says – even if it is not 
the extracts he says what he understands has been 
testified to at the inquiry I would just have a look at the 
relevant statutory provisions and the permission so I 
satisfy myself that even saying what has been said there in 
your own words is okay. 
ADV WITZ:   As you please, Mr Chairman.  Thank you for 
your time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  So, Mr Wakeford, for 
now let us keep this part – let us keep this part, you 
10 
proceed and then at some stage we will come back to it. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, can I also make a suggestion? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Can I also make a suggestion to Mr 
Wakeford? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Wakeford, I think you have 
demonstrated with the extracts you have referred the Chair 
your relationship with Mr Agrizzi, his attitude to race 
20 
relations.  Can we move – or before I even ask you to 
move, this affidavit, this affidavit is going to be admitted, 
the Chair is going to have the affidavit.  You have told him 
that Mr Agrizzi’s relationship with you was - you referred 
him to the extracts.  You have told him Mr Agrizzi’s race 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 51 of 318 
 
relations.  Now the Chairman has got that and if I may ask 
you, but I do not want you to skip what you want to place – 
move - for instance, your next topic is going to be your 
position as the CEO of Armscor, to move to that.  Are you 
happy with that – I will ask you to move to page 877.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I think, Mr Notshe, what you mean is 
that when you look at what appears after the extracts up to 
just before the next topic it seems that a lot of that is 
about Agrizzi’s attitude to black people and so on? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, that is what I am saying, which 
10 
point …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are saying …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Which point has been made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair if I could just, with your 
permission, speak to the end of my relationship with 
Agrizzi, I think it is very important for the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   That would be on page – BOSASA 
04/876. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja.  Chair, this all came to a head 
before he was exited, for want of a better word, out of the 
company.  I was at that time a CEO of Armscor but I still 
retained a relationship with the Watson family, I mean, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 52 of 318 
 
some of their children are godchildren to me as well.  So, 
you know, one continues with relationships, one does not 
just move on when you do not have a consultancy but save 
to say, Chair, that in late 2016 we were having coffee – it 
was myself, Valence Watson, Gavin Watson, Jared Watson, 
Daniel Watson junior, not Cheeky and Gavin got a call from 
Agrizzi to say can he pop in and at that coffee session, for 
want of a better word.  In the course of discussions Agrizzi 
began ventilating his anger with the board of directors of 
BOSASA and then made the following joke.  There are only 
10 
two things I hate – this is his words – the one is a racist 
and the other is a blood K.  I immediately confronted 
Agrizzi objecting that he speak – he is speaking of our 
brothers, you do not speak of our brothers like that to 
which he said do not be so sensitive, it is just a joke.  
Then Agrizzi left.  
When he left, we discussed the incident.  This was 
again confirmation what I suspected of Agrizzi all these 
years, that he was a racist.  I believe that it was shortly 
after this that Agrizzi’s employment with BOSASA was 
20 
terminated in early 2017.  Among the reasons Agrizzi’s 
employment was terminated in March 2017 were: 
1.  His offensive and racist language towards the 
black board of directors. 
2. His autocratic behaviour and complete disregard 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 53 of 318 
 
for the authority of the board of directors.  
It had come to light that Agrizzi had employed numerous 
friends of his within BOSASA without going through 
ordinary human resources processes and two, he had 
awarded substantial salary increases to acolytes of his 
within BOSASA without going through the Remco or 
remuneration committee.  This is evident from the minutes 
of the BOSASA board meeting of the 9 March 2017 where 
inter 
alia 
the 
retrenchment 
of 
these 
employees 
is 
discussed.  His cronyism and clandestine development of a 
10 
fifth column within the BOSASA group. 
 
And, Chair, as I go on you will see that this notion 
of 
a 
fifth 
column 
is 
not 
conspiratorial, 
it 
is 
about 
developing 
a 
grouping 
within 
an 
organisation 
that 
technically pursue their own agenda within the organisation 
and as we go through this, a lot of that will be uncovered 
as well. 
 
Chair, but if I can move on to page where Adv 
Notshe has asked me to speak to my position as CEO of 
Armscor and some of the political machinations there.  
20 
Chair, just to summarise a lot of us.  I was appointed on 
the 1 May 2015 and contrary to some public commentary, 
the appointment was a rigorous process.  I, for the first 
time in many years, had to do competency tests, etcetera, 
and I was told once I had been appointed that I in fact 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 54 of 318 
 
outperformed all the other applicants. 
 
At no stage during my employment did Watson or 
BOSASA try to exploit their historical relationship with us 
and I think have attested to the fact that during my tenure 
we had three clean audits as well as an unqualified audit.   
 
But this was not the case Agrizzi and his son 
Giancarlo who attempted to muscle in a company of 
Giancarlo’s 
on 
defence 
and 
security 
matters, 
policy 
analysis, etcetera.  Even though he was a student at the 
time and Agrizzi speaks about that ad nauseam that his 
10 
son was a student but you will see the CIPC records and 
the LinkedIn adverts and the social media adverts where 
the company had been in existence for quite a while albeit  
with student’s populating the shareholding and the board, 
etcetera. 
 
Interestingly 
enough, 
as 
well, 
that 
company’s 
directors were all linked to the Democratic Alliance and 
there is proof of that albeit that Giancarlo who attacked – 
and the company’s name, Chair, Indlala, trading as Indlala.  
But the point that I am really trying to make, Chair, was 
20 
that every relationship that this man had was exploitable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just give that spelling of Indlala for the 
benefit of the transcribers.  Indlala, the spelling is I-n-d-l-
a-l-a.  That is just for the benefit of the transcribers. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Sir. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 55 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright, continue? 
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair, I am not going to go into all 
the detail of the evidence …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Indlala of course means famine or 
hunger, starvation.  That is what it means. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Chair, I did not know that.  
But the real point, Chair, is that Mr Giancarlo after 
accepting a post within the ANC for a while sustained that 
company and sustained his relationship with his fellow DA 
directors.  I am not sure whether the African National 
10 
Congress was aware of that but that just gives an – you get 
an idea of the value system, the duplicitous nature of the 
people involved but more so, Chair, that Giancarlo came 
forward before the democratic elections of 2019 and made 
certain claims to discredit Gavin Watson as well as the 
ANC even though he had worked there and then a number 
of months later retracted everything with the Citizen, the 
Citizen newspaper. 
 
Chair, it quite a lot that I say there but even 
Agrizzi’s relationship with the DA, there are videos of him 
20 
being visited by Glynnis Breytenbach, Werner Horn, I think 
Breytenbach was the  - or is the shadow Minister of Justice 
and Werner Horn the deputy shadow Minister of Justice 
and Agrizzi often used to brag about that relationship that 
he 
had 
with 
certain 
individuals 
including 
Glynnis 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 56 of 318 
 
Breytenbach and Werner Horn but I am not going to get 
into more of the detail of that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Save to say that could I move on to why 
would this man perjure himself to the point of extinction by 
attacking me so viciously?  Why would he – and I think you 
have asked other witnesses in other work streams as well, 
why would this person lie about you, why would they say 
all these things?  So, Chair, I have tried to – and I am 
going to read from part of it and then from part of it I will 
10 
summarise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   But just to say – and that is on page 
BOSASA 04/884, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR WAKEFORD:    
“Further to what I have mentioned above, which 
evidently motivated Agrizzi to falsely implicate me 
in the alleged corruption at BOSASA, namely: 
1. Our contentious relationship given my historical 
20 
relationship of Watson and the broader Watson 
family. 
2. My non-racial values versus is racist values and 
my questioning of his character and value system 
from the onset. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 57 of 318 
 
3. His perception of my part in the termination of 
his employment with BOSASA. 
4. My usefulness to Agrizzi in all the circumstances 
to 
promote 
the 
interests 
of 
the 
Democratic 
Alliance.   
There is an overarching context including how, 
when and why in fact Agrizzi manufactured these 
allegations 
and 
important 
timelines 
to 
be 
understood and factored in, in order to consider and 
weigh Agrizzi’s allegations before the Commission.  
10 
He confirmed in his oral evidence on the 18 January 
2019 that a meeting was held with alleged whistle 
blowers…” 
And, Chair, none of them are whistle blowers, in my view.  
They use the term very liberally. 
“…at Agrizzi’s home on the 12 November 2017.  The 
following 
must 
be 
noted, 
calling 
them 
whistle 
blowers is a misnomer at the very least because 
they were either being coerced by Agrizzi to make 
false statements or were in cahoots with Agrizzi, his 
20 
nefarious plans and/or were acting purely out of 
self-interest. 
 
This 
was 
confirmed 
to 
the 
Commission on the 26 March in his oral evidence 
and the oral evidence of Petrus Stephanus Venter, a 
former employee of the BOSASA auditors Darcy 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 58 of 318 
 
Herman and Co Incorporated and who attended that 
meeting at Agrizzi’s home when he said he has 
made to prepare a statement.” 
So he came here and told you I was coerced, it was written 
for me by Agrizzi and I had to fill it and sign. 
“In his affidavit of the 11 November 2018 Venter 
said that Agrizzi in fact had drafted his statement 
on his behalf and that Venter merely had to type in 
his personal info.  Venter says in the same affidavit 
Angelo made various threats pertaining to my 
10 
career and personal wellbeing in an attempt to 
intimidate and blackmail me and to get me to sign 
this statement that he drafted on my behalf and I 
signed the statement under duress and due to the 
constant intimidation and blackmail from Agrizzi.” 
And Chair, I think that is people who visited that day in 
order 
to 
blow 
the 
so-called 
whistle, 
their 
affidavits 
apparently were prepared for them by Agrizzi.   In Venter ’s 
affidavit to the Commission annexed, and I have got it here 
Chair, revealed, as he did on Carte Blanche on the 3 r d of 
20 
February 2019: 
“Agrizzi’s corrupt activities, coercion and control of 
people, including Venter and his plan to destroy 
Watson and BOSASA, I refer to Venter ’s affidavit to 
the Commission and in particular the Master Plan.” 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 59 of 318 
 
So Chair to summarise the Master Plan after a series of 
engagements post him leaving where he tried to take over 
contracts of BOSASA, and engaged them on that, then he 
tried to go back to BOSASA and engaged them – this is 
after his damician[?] experience, this is after having his 
tumour cut out, where he said I sat with my family and I 
wanted to come clean.   
 
Well it took him more than two years to come clean 
Chair, it was only after Papa Leshabane and Joe Gumede 
went to the police station to file criminal charges against 
10 
him that he decided that he was going to interact with the 
Commission.  
So 
furthermore, 
Chair 
Foster's 
affidavit 
was 
Commissioned the following day on the 13 t h of November 
2017. The very affidavit he brought here in 2019, was 
prepared two years prior to that or was prepared to be 
exact Chair, on the 13 t h of November 2017.  So Chair, I am 
going to skip quite a bit.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I just want to say Mr Wakeford 
that unfortunately, most of the directors of BOSASA who 
20 
could have come here and said what they may have to say 
about Mr Agrizzi’s evidence did not cooperate.  They were 
given - including the late Mr Watson, they were given what 
we refer to as Rule 33 notices, as well as other people like 
Mr Leshabane and others, Mr Gumede. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 60 of 318 
 
One, they did not respond but in a way one can say 
in regard to responding to 33 notices, they were not 
obliged to but the Commission was very keen to hear what 
they have to say.  To the extent that I issued what we call 
the Regulation 10.6 Directives against them, including Mr 
Gavin Watson, to say come and deal with this matters. 
Unfortunately, they did not respond and then re Mr 
Gavin Watson passed away there were some discussions 
from the reports that I was given from his lawyers, but the 
approach was not really one of a being keen to come 
10 
before the Commission, so that they could deal with this 
issue.  
So it is good that to the extent that you may be 
aware of some of the matters yourself because of your 
relationship with BOSASA and with Mr Gavin Watson, you 
are able to deal with that to say this is the position but I 
just thought I would say that, you know, it is a strange 
situation where people out there who could come and say, 
that is not true what she said about us here but they do not 
want to come. So to the extent that you interacted with 
20 
BOSASA and with Mr Gavin Watson and you know certain 
things, it is good that you are able to deal with them and 
put before the Commission what you know. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair, Chair if I could 
respond to your statement? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 61 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Look, there are two schools of thought 
in South Africa about this Commission.  The one school of 
thought is, is that it is politically weaponised and it is 
going for a particular caucus.  The other one is that it is 
here to seek the truth and to establish the truth.  I have 
opted for the second, for the latter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I believe you are a good man and I 
believe that you are someone who is just trying to clean up 
10 
society 
in 
South 
Africa, 
in 
particular, 
our 
public 
institutions.  But I am sure that you also would want to 
clean up some of our private sector institutions.  Chair I 
have not had contact with the Board of directors for a long 
time and safe to say perhaps we have a different view. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   It is a pity because - and perhaps me 
appearing here will encourage some to come forward if 
there is enough time of course but I think it is a pity that 
there are these two schools of thought. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it is a pity – and I mean, obviously I 
know about the two schools of thought generally in society 
and obviously, people are entitled to form an opinion about 
a public body such as this but I always have difficulty 
understanding this part, if I – if the Commission wants to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 62 of 318 
 
make findings against you Mr Wakeford, it wants a certain 
outcome about you.  Why would it try so much to hear your 
side of the story because is it not easier to come to that 
outcome, without your side of the story.  
Because you might come here and give a very good, 
plausible explanations for things and therefore spoil the 
plan.  I have not understood that part and also, I have 
heard – I have been told that I think it is more than 250 
witnesses, if I am not mistaken over the past two and a 
half years or so. 
10 
Of those maybe there are 1,2 or 3 who have 
expressed unhappiness, that they have not been treated 
fairly, the overwhelming majority have not expressed any 
unfairness and I continue to hear some of the people who 
are implicated, seriously implicated and I would like to 
believe that I give them enough time to put their side of the 
story.  
And when they articulate their concerns, I say let us 
look at those concerns.  Let us look at those - some of 
them might have merit others might not have but let us look 
20 
at look at those and when they say here is some evidence 
about that witness who said A, B, C about me, I say let us 
look at that, you know. 
So but obviously, you know, people will have their 
views at the end and there is nothing one can do from our 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 63 of 318 
 
side, we must just continue to do what we believe is right. 
Try to be as fair as possible, it does not mean that we will 
not make mistakes along the way but let us keep on trying 
to do the best we can, so ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair, and you know Chair 
just to respond to - for me, I was incredibly frustrated 
because I responded fairly quickly with my first my 
affidavit, my application was to cross question and I 
understand the process that testimony fist then cross 
questioning.  
10 
I am not sure whether I will ever get an opportunity 
to cross question Agrizzi, albeit that he was recently seen 
in Franschhoek without an oxygen tank or a mask and with 
no walker, and the Instagram videos flying around South 
Africa on that at the moment.  But even if I do not Chair, I 
have got to do this and I have waited 28 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you have got the opportunity now. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And I have got now my opportunity and I 
am going to use it I am not going to wince and whine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay ja, thank you.  
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see we are at quarter past, which is 
when we normally take the tea break, maybe let us go to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 64 of 318 
 
past and then take the tea break then, okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair, I am going to continue 
with my motivation, which I have summarised because it is 
quite long.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And but to say this, that on page 888 
without mentioning BOSASA for every time.  You see his 
plan, when he could not - when he was exorcised as the 
de-facto CEO then he tried to come back, and it was 
upping and downing and it is all in my evidence. 
10 
His plan was, we will put you under pressure and 
even if we have to see you liquidated, and I was not there 
at the time Chair, but the evidence speaks for itself.  The 
plan was to trigger the media, to trigger the auditors, you 
know what auditors do when they, even if they hear of 
something suspicious, even the banks in this country they 
just close your accounts, with a person being potentially 
innocent, but thank God my bank did not close mine but 
there are many people who had their bank accounts closed 
without any evidence to the effect that it was just rumour 
20 
mongering and fear.  And society in South Africa tends to 
respond at times, very similar to the Salem witches story, 
you know where innocent woman were hung in Salem 
because they were deemed to be guilty by the public 
gallery.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 65 of 318 
 
And we need to manage these things very, very 
carefully in South Africa, because, unfortunately, these 
things caused more polarisation in society.  But his plan 
was at the very worst, the worst option for him, of course, 
was liquidation but he got his liquidation, he got it.  
And 6500 families out of work and Venter confirmed 
all of this in his affidavit, Chair.  Agrizzi’s plan was 
premeditated, calculated and executed to instigate the 
liquidation of BOSASA so that he personally would be able 
to take over BOSASA’s contracts, and no longer be bound 
10 
by his restraint of trade. Indeed, BOSASA went into 
liquidation in February 2019 as per his plan. 
This was not the man who was blowing the whistle, 
Chair with all due respect, this was a man who was greedy, 
he was narcissistic and he wanted to be back in the seat of 
the king, that is what he wanted.  
Chair, I mean, even the banks panicked, the banks 
panicked during that time, the auditors panicked, even I 
think Gavin Watson panicked and went into voluntary 
liquidation.  I am not sure whether I would have done the 
20 
same thing, Chair. I would have come here as quickly as 
possible but the point is, I tried and I could not and 
perhaps we could have saved a bit of that company.  
Chair, I am not going to read some of the quotes 
because those quotes you have not authorised that yet. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 66 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So Chair, his fifth column even went 
with him to Crearis when he left BOSASA, same people 
followed him and what they say about him for an Italian 
businessman of the year - just to give you an idea of how 
he saw himself as the de-facto CEO. 
On the website of Crearis the company that Agrizzi 
formed in 2017 after being terminated from BOSASA he 
described his influence within BOSASA as follows: 
“Angelo's most recent accomplishments can be 
10 
noted in the performance of the BOSASA group now 
known as African Global that he developed from a 
Greenfield operational unit employing only 322 
people 
to 
a 
multinational 
group 
with 
6515 
employees. 
The 
website 
further 
reveals 
the 
management team of the company, this is Crearis, 
was comprised exclusively of former employees of 
BOSASA.” 
Once again the fifth column Chair.  Lastly Agrizzi said in 
an email on the 7 t h of March 2018 to Darcy Herman, the 
20 
auditors of BOSASA that when he left BOSASA in August 
2016, he was inundated with requests from Gavin Watson 
to ensure Agrizzi retake control of the BOSASA group of 
companies and there it is all in the evidence, Chair.   
But just to speak to some of the control that he had 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 67 of 318 
 
when he points fingers at the rest of the world.  He says 
here…[intervene] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   What page are you on? 
MR WAKEFORD:   We are now on sorry, Chair I am guilty 
as charged.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am not charging you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I should have told you as we moved on, 
we are now on page 895. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   He says here; he tells the Commission: 
10 
“The 
payment 
regimes 
and 
protocols 
required 
numerous signatures.  So you would have at least 
four to six signatures on a document to be able to 
get a payment through and to get an order through.  
So 
it 
would 
require 
no 
less 
than 
two 
other 
signatures. 
So 
you 
would 
need 
the 
originator 
signature the person who is placing the order plus it 
would need two others, one of which had to be the 
chief accountant and director.” 
Chair this is verifiably false and I have provided the 
20 
BOSASA company resolutions which demonstrate that 
Agrizzi could approve any transaction if it was counter 
signed by Van Tonder, someone who he worked very 
closely with and who left and joined him at Crearis as far 
as I understand. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 68 of 318 
 
Until 
2017, 
when 
Agrizzi’s 
employment 
was 
terminated Agrizzi and Van Tonder had the collective power 
to, one, sign any documents and do all things as may 
affect and or bind the company and or any of its subsidiary 
companies in any matter whatsoever. And open bank 
accounts and deal with financial institutions in any matter 
regarding the finance and to sign cheques for and on 
behalf of the company its subsidiaries and associates.  
Venter in his paragraph 10 of his affidavit of the 
11 t h of November 2018 confirmed: 
10 
“Andries Van Tonder and Angelo Agrizzi had full 
control of the company and nobody questioned it.” 
Except me Chair, and I think there is sufficient on the 
record for that already.  
“It is through this authority that Agrizzi and Van 
Tonder were collectively able to siphon substantial 
amounts of funds out of BOSASA by way of an 
example Chair Agrizzi and Van Tonder were the sole 
members of Syncroprop number 8 close cooperation 
commonly known as CC.” 
20 
And you can see the CIPC entity search in the annexures, 
as 
the 
sole 
members, 
they 
would 
prepare 
fictitious 
invoices, send these fictitious invoices to BOSASA and 
then authorise them for payment in their capacities as 
Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 69 of 318 
 
group.  
In the invoice example attached you can see that 
the invoice is approved with only two signatories Agrizzi 
and Van Tonder.  Venter in paragraph 8 and 11 of his 
affidavit of the 11 t h of November 2018 confirmed his own 
participation in one such scheme where Agrizzi and Van 
Tonder with instruction to fictitiously inflate invoices, which 
Agrizzi and Van Tonder would then approve. 
The 
three 
parties 
would 
then 
share 
in 
these 
proceeds of crime and Agrizzi and Van Tonder would 
10 
thereafter instruct Venter where to pay their commission's 
as he referred to them.   
“In this regard payments were made to or on behalf 
of Agrizzi, Van Tonder and Agrizzi’s wife Debbie 
Agrizzi.” 
It is because of schemes such as these that the BOSASA 
liquidated to serve Agrizzi and Van Tonder with letters of 
demand for R91million and R21million respectively.  In 
June 2020 - this however came after criminal charges had 
already been filed by African Global Holdings against 
20 
Agrizzi and Van Tonder and Venter in November 2019 for 
theft, fraud and money laundering of R37.5million and 
apparently there is more to come Chair.  These criminal 
charges further made reference to companies that Agrizzi 
used BOSASA to make payments to where his wife Deborah 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 70 of 318 
 
Agrizzi was the director. This involvement of Agrizzi’s wife 
in 
these 
schemes 
was 
further 
confirmed 
by 
Colonel 
Bernardus Lazarus, who opposed Agrizzi’s bail application 
at the Palm Ridge Magistrates Court in October last year.  
Here Lazarus confirmed that Agrizzi and his wife 
moved millions of rands offshore and into crypto currency 
accounts with Deborah transferring 11.9…[intervene] 
ADV M WITZ:   Sorry, sorry, Chair if I can just raise two 
issues here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV M WITZ:   In relation to this, firstly, all that has been 
verified and confirmed that it was all done with Reserve 
Bank approval.  There was nothing illegal about the 
transfer. Secondly, I received or I apologise I had to leave 
the room, I received an urgent request the liquidators of 
the BOSASA and African Global Group say they are very, 
very perturbed in regards to the fact that reference is 
being made to what happened at a 417 inquiry. 
They can be here at 2 o'clock and they would like 
permission, if necessary to deal with it because they say 
20 
as far as they are concerned, no input or permission was 
sought 
from 
them. 
 The 
master 
has 
not 
asked 
for 
submissions input and they would like if necessary to make 
submissions in regards to references that Mr Wakeford is 
making in this regard to try and bolster and sustain his 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 71 of 318 
 
attack on various issues and credibility.   
And if he knew the correct facts, and his legal 
representatives would have approached my instructing 
attorney or myself we would have told them that whatever 
Colonel Lazarus said all this was done and the true facts 
were placed before a High Court Judge with regards to the 
bail appeal where bail was granted very recently to say 
that all this was done with Reserve Bank approval, nothing 
was spirited out the country, etcetera.  
So the picture that h is trying to paint with respect 
10 
Mr Wakeford in utilising evidence and trying to utilise 
extracted support his stance in regards to his obvious 
dislike, if one was to put it as likely as that for Mr Agrizzi 
we submit that this cannot be used at this stage because 
these are not the correct facts that he is putting before 
you.  
And if he wants to create fact we are happy to 
provide him with the correct facts and the liquidators would 
like that opportunity.  I spoke to their counsel to approach 
if necessary.  We do not want you to – I know what the 
20 
purpose of this is, we know what you want to do, we do not 
want to delay it further.  
But they say they can be here 2 o'clock because 
they need to address - they found it very, very - and I think 
that affects not only liquidators and not only affect Section 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 72 of 318 
 
417 
of 
the 
Companies 
Act 
but 
also 
the 
presiding 
Honourable Judge Joffe who dealt with it, this is going to 
have 
a 
huge 
impact 
on 
future 
417’s 
that 
without 
submissions and permission, that information is now being 
put in the public domain which takes away the whole 
inference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me say this, anything relating to 
what has been testified to in the Section 417 inquiry, I said 
let us for now not deal with it, okay.  I said that later on Mr 
Wakeford could deal with it after I have applied my mind to 
10 
the legal position and after I have heard everybody.  
But since saying that, I have begun to think of a 
different way of dealing with this and that might affect the 
question of whether the liquidators or their counsel will 
come here or not.  
I am going to suggest that for today, let Mr 
Wakeford give his evidence that he needs to give and 
leave out one extracts from what may be evidence in the 
417 inquiry or his understanding of what evidence has 
been given there for now, and what I would propose is that 
20 
maybe each side, your side and counsel for Mr Wakeford 
and the legal team, and if the liquidators want to also come 
in there, that's fine.  
Give 
me 
some 
short 
notes 
of 
the 
relevant 
provisions, under what circumstances what can be done in 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 73 of 318 
 
relation to evidence in a 417 enquiry but I would like to 
look at that without the pressure of having to allow this 
today.  But the view, the idea would be, that can be given 
to me, in due course, and once I have had a look at it, I 
can then indicate what my position is which might not need 
oral argument but if I think it is necessary, we can take it 
from there.  
But one would like to dispose of this without, you 
know, much unless it's really necessary in terms of oral 
argument.  But once I have taken a view, then I can let you 
10 
know and if I must make a ruling, I can make a ruling and if 
the ruling is such that the extracts can be written out, and 
the – or a summary can be given of what has been testified 
to in the inquiry, then we can take it from there if 
necessary.  
It should not take long it might be less than an hour 
or for an hour for Mr Wakeford to come back and just deal 
with that or we might just arrange that his counsel can for 
the sake of publicly showing what they believe supports Mr 
Wakeford’s 
version 
can 
then 
read 
out 
the 
extracts, 
20 
obviously, if I conclude that they should not be read out 
and to what has been testified to in the inquiry should not 
be mentioned here, then obviously, that is the end of the 
matter as far as the Commission is concerned.  
So that is what I have in mind.  So in other words, that we 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 74 of 318 
 
do not rush to do everything today.  Let me get time, we 
can agree maybe as to when counsel for Mr Wakeford can 
submit, I do not want to call it written submissions, but it is 
written submissions but when I say note I am just trying to 
indicate that is a very narrow issue, you know, but it is 
written 
submissions 
on 
the 
question 
of 
whether 
Mr 
Wakeford can read out the extracts that are said to be 
evidence that was given at 417 Inquiry, that is point 1, 
point 2, whether even if he doesn’t read out extracts 
whether he can say what he understands to be evidence 
10 
given there in his own words and then I can take it from 
there, that is what I have in mind. 
 
What do you say is that fine with you? 
ADV WITZ:   Chair I am more than satisfied to do it on that 
basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   I have got no problem at all, I think that is 
practical and I think that would be correct, but just to sort 
out for record purposes for example he now wants to give 
evidence, Mr Wakeford, about crypto currency and illegal – 
20 
this was all done through Luno, all the evidence is there, 
so he is trying to utilise and select certain parts that he 
thinks will support his version in regards to the veracity or 
the credibility or the so-called ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that fall under – I am sorry – does 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 75 of 318 
 
that fall under the 417 Inquiry because ...[intervenes]  
ADV WITZ:   No it is now coming to matters relating to a 
different charge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s finish on the 417 inquiry first. 
ADV WITZ:   Yes 417 I am happy with the proposal and I 
think the liquidators, and I will convey it, the liquidators 
are present and their attorneys, and I will convey it to their 
counsel and I think that would be a correct approach and 
we can then put forward, but it is just disturbing that for 
whatever reason secret documentation ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well this affidavit is it the one that 
was only given to Mr Agrizzi yesterday or something? 
ADV WITZ:   No he hasn’t got it yet this morning. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This one he got it this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so that is why there would not have 
been a chance to respond to it? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV WITZ:   But we will respond to it Chair with your 
permission and we will make sure it is very, very quick. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   In a time turnaround to respond so we don’t 
delay the Commission in any way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WITZ:   And we would like to continue with our 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 76 of 318 
 
cooperation and assistance, but we only got it this 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, no that is fine.  Counsel for 
Mr Wakeford 417 is that fine with you? 
ADV WILLS:  Thank you Mr Chairman, indeed it is although 
you pretty much dealt with it earlier, this has been a 
regretful interruption, so I am in agreement with that but 
let me say this – it is regrettable that my learned friend 
has interrupted my client’s giving of testimony, questioning 
his evidence as giving evidence almost from the Bar.   
10 
 
Mr Agrizzi can come and be cross-examined, we 
look forward to it, we invite it, we prevail upon you Mr 
Chairman to find that time to deal with Mr Agrizzi under 
cross-examination and he can answer to all of these things 
thereafter.   To now from the Bar to criticise Mr Wakeford is 
– must be objected to.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that is what – well I want to say I 
understand that ordinarily if this affidavit had been given to 
Mr Agrizzi or his legal team quite some time back they 
might have been able to respond and put their version, in 
20 
which case Mr Wakeford would have been aware of their 
response, at least at the time of giving evidence and would 
deal with Mr Agrizzi’s version but since they got it today 
obviously there hasn’t been enough time, but obviously it 
is not going to help to deal with it now, because Mr Agrizzi 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 77 of 318 
 
will respond, but it will be important obviously that he 
responds, so let us allow Mr Wakeford to continue on the 
understanding that Mr Agrizzi might have a different 
version and that he will respond. 
 
I think what may be necessary – what may be 
necessary is that during the break maybe that issue can be 
discussed among the legal teams in terms of Mr Agrizzi’s 
response because obviously we should have it as soon as 
possible. 
 
Okay, and then I can approve whatever timeframe 
10 
can be agreed, okay, alright.   Well we have gone beyond 
half past, let’s – it is twenty to twelve, let’s take the tea 
break now, but I had intended to say Mr Wakeford – to stop 
you at twelve so that Mr Notshe could then put questions 
up to one o’clock and then we take the lunch break, of 
course out of the time I had meant to give you has been 
taken out by the discussion, so I think when we come back 
I will give you maybe about fifteen minutes if you can try 
and deal with what remains in terms of important points the 
I would like to allow Mr Notshe to start putting questions to 
20 
you, and then we proceed, is that fine?   Is that fine? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I hope it is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but what we can do obviously when 
Mr Notshe asks you questions he will cover some of the 
things that you might not have covered and when he asks 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 78 of 318 
 
you questions you can then take that opportunity when you 
respond to deal with them, but at the end of the process if 
there is – there are issues that you feel you have not had a 
chance to deal with property you can still make the request 
to be given that chance, alright? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, we will then take the tea 
adjournment, let’s resume at twelve o’clock. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Wakeford let me give you up to 
quarter past twelve to … 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair the – the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To wrap up. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair before you allocate the time to him  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There are little issues which are just 
20 
housekeeping we need to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  During the adjournment the legal 
representatives of Mr Wakeford and Mr Willis and the 
liquidators we got together and we are trying to put together 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 79 of 318 
 
what the timeframes.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  For dealing with this issue of the 
transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  With your permission – with your 
permission we have agreed that we would exchange between 
ourselves the submissions – but the submissions will be 
submitted to you by twelve o’clock on Tuesday the 11 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The submissions by all parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then – and then Chair it is also 
pointed out to me by I think the liquidators that the – but we 
need your guidance on this. The – Mr Watson – Gerard 
Watson the one who has got the transcript he got it through 
an application he made to the Commissioner in the 417 
proceedings and then he was allowed by Judge Joffe – but 
Judge Joffe said it is only for – for his purpose for Mr 
Watson’s purpose.   
20 
The question is that I have been asked to put to your 
attention that there is a ruling by Judge Joffe as a 
Commissioner that this is only for Mr Watson.  Now we are 
not certain whether Judge Joffe has an interest in the 
exercise of deciding whether this should now be put in public 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 80 of 318 
 
or not but we – we were are not certain we seek your 
guidance in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think that he can be informed of 
what is happening here through I think the whoever is 
appearing there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The liquidators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Through – no whoever is appearing there – 
whoever is appearing there I am looking at what is counsel 
for Mr Agrizzi I do not know or… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Judge the – Chairperson there are the 
10 
gentlemen who are representing the liquidators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  He – well I do not know who should 
inform him but I am saying he can be informed of what is 
going on here. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know and if he wishes to say anything 
he would be free to do so but I do not think it is compulsory 
for him to say something but if he wishes to say something 
… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No that is fine. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine ja.  But that arrangement that 
you have made is in order so that I have all the sub – written 
submissions not later than Tuesday the 11t h. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 81 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:  Sorry. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then Chairperson but before … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay I think before you say somebody 
wants to say something. 
ADV WILLIS:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About this ja. 
ADV WILLIS:  Mr Chairman by agreement between the 
parties 
who 
had 
the 
discussions 
there 
will 
also 
be 
submissions from Mr Gerard Watson or should I say African 
Global Holdings because they are the ones. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV WILLIS:  With the – with the transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:  Between him and the company and the 
liquidators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV WILLIS:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine.  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is right.  So what we have done 
during the break we have created a sub-bundle and which 
20 
only contains the affidavit of Mr Watson together with 
annexures.  With your leave it is marked BOSASA Bundle 
4(A) and it is a small bundle which… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay should I take it that it contains part 
of what I have got in this bundle but also it has stuff that I do 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 82 of 318 
 
not have? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes what it – what it does now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The annexures. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It contains the affidavit together with 
annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It contains everything that Mr Wakeford 
submitted yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not want – you did not want to just 
slot the annexures at the back of this one?  Is there not 
10 
enough space? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  They did not – not enough – it is not 
enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because that is much more convenient. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It did not – there is not enough space 
because Chair if we do that it is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I think what we should do – no – 
because I think you should slot as many as you can slot into 
this affidavit and then go onto the next affidavit – file if there 
are not enough and then that file can then be A.  You said 
20 
this one is what?  Oh this one is 4 A – is that (inaudible). 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  4A – the main one – the main one – the 
big one we started with is 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Right. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then we took the Item 12 which 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 83 of 318 
 
contains Mr Wakeford’s affidavit and we put it in 4(A) 
together with his annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well this is 4(A) which I have got. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is – this is what we have put on 
your desk during the break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  These? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  It is not what you were working on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh … 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So we took – we took… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are the annexures here now? 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The annexures are there now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay but that is what – the one that I 
had before tea was – or what? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We took – we took the one you had 
before tea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which was what? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Which was – which was Item – Item 12 in 
the big file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No in terms of bundle – bundle? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It was – we took it from Bundle 4. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But Item 12 in Bundle 4 we took it and 
put it here in this new sub-bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I do not like the new thing unless it is a 
continuation of the old thing. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 84 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will tell you what I think I would like – I 
would have liked.  I would like to continue to have what I 
had. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you can add but if there is no 
space to add then there can be another file where you then 
put on the other things then it is a – it is a continuation.  You 
can then make the new file you can give it a bundle number. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Fine Chair.  Chair then… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I want to make sure that the 
references we have made are the same. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There will be no change  it is just a 
change of the – but it is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Can – it is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us do it that way then it is much more 
simple. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Can we continue now with what we 
have? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Before us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And I will – we will move the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Alright let us keep what we have 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 85 of 318 
 
and then we will add if we need to add but let us not replace.  
Okay.  Alright Mr Wakeford. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay it is ten past … 
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair if I could work with your concession 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  What I have to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  At – from my counsel have advised me 
10 
that I must get through the substance of the allegations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course. 
MR WAKEFORD:  And of course my response to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  So I am going to finish off on the 
motivation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Which is on page … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us talk about – let us talk about the 
… 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  This one – 4901. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us talk about the time.   
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I was proposing giving you fifteen 
minutes to say whatever you need to say but as I said that is 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 86 of 318 
 
not the end because when he questions you – when he 
questions you in relation to certain matters that you might 
not have dealt with or did not deal with adequately you can 
then answer fully. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Ja 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at the end when you are done if there 
are aspects that you feel are important and you have not had 
the chance to deal with them I will give you that chance. But 
your counsel will be allowed to re-examine you if he wishes 
to. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand.  So in the end I do not 
think you will feel that there is something that you have not 
had a chance to deal with properly.  It is just a way of going 
about it. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Just understand my heart Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I understand. 
MR WAKEFORD:  But my heart is this that I have waited for 
more than two years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I accept that. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  And the alleger of all of this had lots of 
latitude. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I will give you that chance it is a 
question of when. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Thank you Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 87 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but in the end when you are done the 
idea is that you should be able to feel that you have been 
given adequate time to deal with issues. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Okay thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR WAKEFORD:  So to sum up Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
MR WAKEFORD:  On the – the motivation of Agrizzi. 
1. He primarily wanted and I am on page – sorry Sir – I 
am on page 901 – BOSASA 04901 starting at 195. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay – okay – now I think I have the 
new file is it not? 
MR WAKEFORD:  I can give you the other number as well. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That – the  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on – hang on. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chairperson the – what he did we took 
what you have we took it from the old file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You will see – you will see Chair we still 
– if you see there is a sticker which is sticking out it says 12. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It was item 12 in the old file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But it is sitting now on the new cover. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but now you see you are confusing me 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 88 of 318 
 
because remember I said let us continue with what we had – 
so you have taken out the – the certain parts. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We have taken out Item 12 that is Mr 
Wakeford’s affidavit and put it in this new file together with 
its annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was wrong with keeping what we 
had? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We thought – we thought because the 
annexures could not fit in the old – in this old thick file 
instead of having the affidavit on its own. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no we spending too time on this.  Bring 
back the old file. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We have –  
CHAIRPERSON:  We spending too much time on it.  Yes, ja 
okay.  Bring back the old file and then – okay so that is the 
old file and there is a separate file which we will go to if 
necessary, is that right?  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is the file now with the exhibits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes so when we need to go to exhibits we 
can go there. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay.  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Thank you Chair I am going to just end off 
on the motivation because it is very important. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 89 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   
1. He primarily wanted to destroy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said we must go to 9 something – 
page 9 something? 
MR WAKEFORD:  So it is page – Chair 901. 
CHAIRPERSON:  901.  Ja okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Starting at point 195 the last section of it 
– it is really a summary. 
1. He primarily wanted to destroy the reputations of 
Watson and the black board of directors at BOSASA 
10 
guided by his racism to create the perception that the 
board of the company would have no option but to step 
down and appoint him as the CEO of the Group or risk 
the business liquidating. 
2. Failing that Agrizzi would want to see the Group 
liquidate utilising his contacts within the media and 
political structures so that he may obtain the Group’s 
contracts in his own entity that was Crearis and 
3. When criminal charges were opened against him by his 
former employers however he clearly thought it would 
20 
be politically expedient to utilise the commission to 
both repackage his own discretions while earning 
favour with the DA by implicating the ANC in corruption 
shortly before the general election only four months 
later.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 90 of 318 
 
So Chair that – that brings to an end the allega – the 
motivation, the summary of that.  Chair I have gone through 
the allegations and some of my responses to point out – I 
opened with this but in summary just to say that none of the 
facts or the so called allegations that he presented aligned 
with a real time timeline and certainly did not match up with 
the accounting records both in my books and elsewhere 
including African Global or BOSASA. 
 
So Chair the disputed allegations I am not going to 
read through which start on page – sorry Chair I keep 
10 
forgetting  
CHAIRPERSON:  905. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Ja – the disputed allegations – you correct 
Chair 905.  I am not going to read through verbatim what 
was said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  In January 2019 I think we all know that 
he alleged that I was involved in getting someone within 
SARS George Papadakis to fix certain things within SARS 
and to date there has been absolutely no evidence to that 
20 
effect.  Number 1. 
2. He said that I was paid R100 000.00 a month to do that 
which is patently untrue and I demonstrate that with the 
accounting records and emails – strangely enough 
provided by him in previous affidavits which point to the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 91 of 318 
 
fact that I say you have not paid me for so many 
months when are we going to resolve this?   
So all of that is provided in the evidence.  By the same token 
the Lindela contract he states that the main reason for – for 
corrupting Aniel Radhakrishna was to get an extension of the 
contract. 
 
Now no extension ever took place.  If you read the 
initial contract the first addendum, the second addendum 
there was never any such thing. 
 
So Chair I am not going to – I have given you a 
10 
summary of the allegations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Both by Vorster and Agrizzi and in fact 
Agrizzi on the cement matter refers to Vorster and says well 
you tidy it up and give the whole story because I do not have 
it. 
 
So if we move on Chair to the – now I am talking to 
the substance of my responses and that is on page 910 
Chair at the bottom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got that. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  Good.  It says: 
“The 
allegations 
made 
by 
Agrizzi 
in 
paragraph 43.4 of his affidavit are false in 
every 
respect. 
 
No 
such 
meeting 
or 
discussion ever occurred. Watson and Agrizzi 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 92 of 318 
 
nor have I ever told any part with BOSASA or 
otherwise that Papadakis could resolve any 
issues at SARS.  No such agreement for the 
provision of services in relation to SARS 
invest – ever existed or was entered into 
between me and BOSASA.” 
 
No agreement between BOSASA and myself for 
R100 000.00 per month ever existed either.  That – this is 
why neither such an agreement has been produced by 
Agrizzi.  
 
10 
 
As already addressed above over the period of 2006 
to April 2015 I had a consultancy retainer with BOSASA 
through my close corporation for an amount of R50 000.00 
per month.  This is quite evident from all financial records.  
 
My records reflect that inter alia I received a monthly 
retained of R50 000.00 plus VAT and on – on the few 
occasions where payments received exceeded R50 000.00 
they either related to expenses incurred on BOSASA’s behalf 
or arrears payments of my monthly retainer. 
 
At no stage was – was I ever contractually paid 
20 
R100 000.00 
per 
month 
whether 
to 
assist 
SARS 
investigations or for any other purpose.  The only months 
when I received R100 000.00 was as a result of arrears 
payments or catch up payments on my monthly retainer from 
months when Agrizzi had not paid me. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 93 of 318 
 
 
The schedule of invoices sent and payments received 
from BOSASA companies and that is annexed in EA218 – but 
Chair I am not going to take you there in the interest of time 
I am sure your team are very able to scrutinise that as to its 
authenticity 
and 
correctness 
reflects 
that 
Agrizzi 
first 
stopped paying my monthly invoice in December 2009.  
Subsequently when payments to me resumed on the 24t h of 
June 2010 double payments were processed to me as catch 
up payments.  All amounts received by my CC have been 
confirmed by the commission to my bank statements. 
10 
 
I further appointed independent auditing firm Full 
Serve Chartered Accountants to analyse my financial records 
for the purposes of this commission. 
 
Here Full Serve reviewed.  My CC bank account 
statements going back to 2009 and April 2015 when my 
services with BOSASA concluded.  BOSASA’s general ledger 
of payments to my CC from 2007 until April 2015 and my 
invoices and ledger of receipts of payments during that 
period. 
 
The letter confirms inter alia that the escalated 
20 
payments that I received were previously unpaid months 
together with the current month hence a double payment for 
that month and this is normal business practice.  That these 
payments were nothing more than catch up payments for 
previously unpaid invoices is clearly reflected in email 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 94 of 318 
 
correspondence between me and Agrizzi over the period.   
 
Agrizzi provided these emails to the commission 
previously in an attempt to support his representations 
however contrarily they actually proved the truth of my own 
representations to the commission. 
 
In the email correspondence of 21s t August 2010 I 
said the following to Agrizzi. 
Hi Angelo any conclusion on my July 2010 catch up 
payment?  Is there any matters I am unaware of – if there 
are any please let me know  - no offence. 
10 
 
This reason was sent – this – the reason this was 
sent was as Agrizzi had paid me my first catch up payment in 
June 2010 but then once again did not pay me an amount for 
July 2010. 
 
And Chair I – I go on and on quoting different emails 
proving that what he said was an absolute lie.  But Chair I 
am – I am going to speak to the fact that – that based on 
some of the info we have that Agrizzi purposely held back 
payments due to me speaks to the relationship and why he 
has gunned for me here.  It was specifically Agrizzi’s 
20 
protests that prevented me from being paid on time.  
Payments due to me have – have had to be doubled up when 
they were – when they were not paid with records of this 
evidence stating and there is an annexure to that effect. 
 
I am not going to read from the 417 transcripts once 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 95 of 318 
 
again Chair and I am not going to speak to – let me just tell 
you what page it is – I am moving quite quickly Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
MR WAKEFORD:  We are on page 916. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  I am going to – to speak to this so called 
link because he said I was paid to assist with SARS.  So at 
the bottom of that page I said I am reliably informed that the 
depths 
of 
Agrizzi’s 
lies 
can 
be 
seen 
from 
other 
documentation which I cannot speak to now but I am sure 
10 
you will make a ruling on that Chair because he has 
definitely purged himself on a number of different occasions. 
 
I am not going to speak to – to Vorster’s stuff 
because it is really a repeat of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you have dealt with that earlier. 
MR WAKEFORD:  What he said.  Chair I will – I need to 
touch on Lindela and the DHA which was the other major 
issue. That is on page 927 Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got it. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Thank you Chair.  In paragraph 44.4 of his 
20 
founding affidavit to the commission Agrizzi attempted to 
incriminate myself and Aniel Radhakrishna in matters of 
state capture by stating that we both had been party to 
facilitating a five-year extension to the contract between 
BOSASA 
and 
DHA 
for 
the 
operation 
of 
the 
Lindela 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 96 of 318 
 
Repatriation Centre. 
2. More favourable contract terms were included in the 
contract for BOSASA. 
Again I am reliably – okay I am not going to refer to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja – yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  And I am not going to refer to that.  The 
review the following page under point 272 Chair.  The review 
that Agrizzi refers to in paragraph 44.2 in his evidence 
relates to two addendums to the original Lindela contract of 
2005.  These addendums the second and third addendum to 
10 
the 2005 contract were concluded and signed on two 
different dates one being the 18t h of February 2008 and the 
13t h of March 2009 respectively. 
 
The original Lindela contract was for the provision of 
detention services for illegal foreigners at the Lindela 
Repatriation facility inclusive of accommodation, meals and 
security. This contract was concluded between Leading 
Prospect Trading a subsidiary of the BOSASA Group and the 
DHA and was for a ten-year period Chair of 1 October 2005 
to 1 October 2015. 
20 
 
So there would have been no need in 2009 to 
concern oneself with an extension.  In 2007 the Home Affairs 
turnaround project was implemented involving large scale 
restructuring of the Department of Home Affairs.  Fever Tree 
Consulting commonly known as Fever Tree was contracted 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 97 of 318 
 
by the DHA to determine the scope of the turnaround project 
and 
identified 
a 
comprehensive 
set 
of 
transformation 
projects 
for 
the 
Department 
including 
reviewing 
and 
renegotiating existing contracts. 
 
Chair this was a very small part of the overall 
turnaround – minute in fact if one had to look at the scope 
and scale of that project and Chair this project won 
international awards.  We were even invited 00:27:13 of 
Fever Tree was invited to Princeton to deliver a paper  on 
this public sector project and it was granted other awards 
10 
locally as well.  It was in my view a shining example of how 
you go about transforming a state entity 
 
In early 2007 I was contacted by the Minister of 
Home Affairs who at the time was Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula 
who requested me to oversee and then to oversee the then 
envisaged turnaround project.  This project was endorsed by 
cabinet under the Presidency of the former President Thabo 
Mbeki.  This project was endorsed by cabinet giving the on-
going crisis within Home Affairs. 
 
Due 
to 
a 
lack 
of 
senior 
leadership 
numerous 
20 
suspensions within the DHA a legacy of poor infrastructure 
and IT systems as well as poor governance – a poor 
governance environment Fever Tree the local part of AT 
Curley was appointed. 
 
AT Curley were highly regarded due to their previous 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 98 of 318 
 
success within the public sector in South Africa namely at 
the 
South 
African 
Revenue 
Service 
– 
SARS 
and 
internationally through successful execution of Home Affairs 
related projects in the USA, Belgium and Netherlands. 
 
I informed the Minister at the time that I was 
providing consulting services to the Premier of the Eastern 
Cape Province as well as advising the BOSASA Group of 
Companies.  My appointment as Ministerial Turnaround 
Advisor was through my Close Corporation.  This lasted for 
two years 2007 to 2009 and ended the month before the 
10 
2009 general elections. 
 
As stated above I continued to consult to BOSASA 
and other clients in the private sector.   
 
And one can even scrutinise the hours I put in there – 
it was not a full day because I had other clients. 
 
During the Turnaround Project new and improved 
service level agreements commonly known as SLA’s were 
negotiated with all key suppliers to the Department of Home 
Affairs including SETA which was a government entity, 
Telkom – a government entity, SAPO – a government entity, 
20 
XPS – a government entity owned by SAPO, Mtweze Double 
Ring, GPW or Government Printing Work and Leading 
Prospects Trading.  Of [word cut] only Mtweze Double Ring 
and Lindela had existing contracts in place.  All other 
contracts had expired or did not exist with DHA.  At all 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 99 of 318 
 
material times when in relation to BOSASA or any of my 
clients I was mindful of possible conflicts of interest and 
without exception made full disclosures and recused myself 
from any decisions involving or relating to my clients.   
 
I was the minister ’s turnaround advisor and 
programme manager and indeed at the helm of the 
Turnaround Project.  However, I oversaw 55 projects and 
seven work streams and was monitoring of these against 
contracted deliverables.  I was at no stage, whatsoever, 
even 
remotely 
involved 
in 
the 
Lindela 
Contract 
10 
renegotiations.   
 
I never attended or took part with any meeting 
with Agrizzi or Watson concerning the renegotiations of 
Lindela.  I am going to skip a bit of that Chair and move on 
to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And move onto 283: 
“I had never been party to any deal with 
Radhadkrishna and/or Agrizzi and/or Gavin 
Watson. 
20 
Agrizzi would have met Radhakhrishna at the 
respective negotiations sessions between the 
DHA and BOSASA. 
Once again,  Agrizzi was at the helm...” 
 
If you look at all these contracts and their 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 100 of 318 
 
addendums, he was the signatory to all of them not Gavin 
Watson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   “The culmination of these negotiations  
was the second and third addendums to the 
original 2005 contract as referred to above.   
As already stated, I was not part of these 
negotiations in any way. 
However, I have taken the time to review the 
contract and the two addendums concluded 
10 
while I was an advisor to the Minister of Home 
Affairs on the overall Turnaround Project...” 
 
Chair, that the salient points of the second 
addendum, that was in 2008, are: 
“1. The DHA would receive a monthly saving 
of R 640 000,00. 
2. 
The minimum monthly threshold of 3250 
persons with the DHA was liable for within the 
original 2005 contract was reduced to 2500 
persons.   
20 
Variable cost for food would only be applicable 
when a number of immigrants held at the 
facility exceeded the minimum threshold of 
2500 persons. 
Annual adjustments to pricing would be based 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 101 of 318 
 
on the prevailing CPIX, that is your inflation 
formula. 
This condition, however, was already present 
in the original contract. 
The salient points of the third addendum, and 
this is even better for the fiscus: 
1. The 
parties 
and 
the 
trip 
to 
meet 
by 
April 2015 before the expiry of the original 
contract 
in 
October 
2015 
to 
discuss 
the 
extension of the contract beyond the initial 
10 
period of 2005 to 2015. 
The DHA may at this time in its sole discretion 
extent 
the 
initial 
period 
until 
the 
31 s t  of 
October 2018. 
If extended by the DHA, the contract would 
continue on the same terms and conditions as 
the current agreement. 
However, the monthly charge payable by the 
DHA would be reduced by the capital cost of 
the facility of R 1,8 million per month. 
20 
A reduction of the monthly amortisation cost of 
the facility payable by the DHA of R 42 000,00. 
If the occupancy of the facility was below 50% 
of the minimum threshold of any 36-month 
period the DHA would be able to reduce the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 102 of 318 
 
variable 
cost 
component 
of 
the 
monthly 
charge. 
The DHA were given a CPIX holiday of 6-
months...” 
 
Which ended up, by the way Chair, of becoming 
5-years because Mr Agrizzi failed to implement within his 
own jurisdiction and his own company where he was Chief 
Operating Officer and de facto CEO, he failed to remember 
this clause and in fact benefited the state even more. 
“BOSASA would provide additional medical 
10 
services at no additional cost and BOSASA 
would 
spend 
an 
additional 
R 5 million 
in 
upgrading facilities and would provide the DHA 
with remove access facilities. 
The DHA would have an option during the full 
length of that contract to purchase the Lindela 
facility at a price determined by a registered 
independent valuer. 
The DHA would have a right of first refusal on 
any other to purchase the facility by a third 
20 
party. 
Each and every individual contractual term of 
the two addendums above was for the benefit 
of the DHA and not the benefit of BOSASA.  
I pause here to draw attention to the fact that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 103 of 318 
 
the extension referred to in the contract was 
only to be determined by the DHA 6-years after 
the signing of the third addendum. 
A decision to be made 6-years after myself and 
Radhakrishna were no longer connected to the 
DHA in any way. 
No 
extension 
was 
eventually 
awarded 
to 
BOSASA in 2015 anyway. 
In fact, Agrizzi has attempted to repurpose the 
demands himself made on the DHA where 
10 
Agrizzi had stated to the DHA at the time in 
2007 that he would only consider reducing the 
monthly invoice to the DHA under the condition 
that the original contract be extended for five 
years. 
This addressed in page 9 of the Lindela 
negotiations 
under 
Outcomes, 
Deep 
Dive, 
which is EA-295...” 
 
But Chair, I am not going to take you there in the 
interest of time.   
20 
“At this time, the recommendation was that the 
DHA 
should 
only 
consider 
a 
three 
year 
potential renewal ultimately through Agrizzi 
although 
Agrizzi 
was 
never 
afforded 
the 
extension he demanded. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 104 of 318 
 
Regarding 
cost 
savings 
implemented, 
the 
report of the accounting officer in the 2008 
annual financial statements...” 
 
And you will remember Chair that he was the 
Director General, Mavuso Msimang, a man of great calibre 
and who ran that department extremely well and he knew 
that he was in charge, not me, not any DGB, he was in 
charge and he did his work properly. 
“This was based on the annual saving of 
R 7.68 million as a result of the 640 000 
10 
monthly saving provided. 
This 
would 
create 
future 
cost 
savings 
of 
R 68 million on the remainder of the Lindela 
contract. 
In 
addition 
to 
the 
cost 
of 
the 
contract 
decreasing immediately, if the contract was 
extended 
at 
the 
sole 
discretion 
of 
the 
department the cost would be further reduced 
by an annual R 1.8 million per month reducing 
additional 
savings, 
future 
savings 
of 
20 
R 112 million. 
The 
Commission’s 
investigators 
have 
subsequently 
reviewed 
actual 
billings 
by 
BOSASA 
to 
the 
DHA 
and 
confirmed 
the 
following. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 105 of 318 
 
Before 
the 
renegotiations 
commenced, 
BOSASA 
invoiced 
the 
DHA 
3250 
persons 
multiplied by 30.4 days because that is the 
average month in a year, multiplied by R 79.90 
per person which came out at R 7.8 million 
monthly. 
After 
renegotiation, 
the 
two 
addendums 
concluded in February 2009. 
BOSASA invoiced the DHA 2500 persons x 
30.4 x 99.41 per person which came out at 
10 
R 7.5 million monthly. 
One would ask, why the increase to 99.41?  
That 
is 
factoring 
in 
principle 
inflationary 
increases which would have happened anyway. 
This 
amount 
remained 
the 
same 
for 
the 
following 62-months until March 2014. 
This means that no annual CPIX increases 
were implemented over this five year period. 
This confirms that the price paid by the DHA 
over the two addendums was 333 000 less 
20 
than the DHA paid before negotiation, clearly a 
benefit to the DHA and not BOSASA. 
However, 
this 
ignores 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
increase in price from R 79,00 to R 99,00 per 
day was brought about as a result of the CPIX 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 106 of 318 
 
which I have just mentioned. 
If this is considered the true price before 
renegotiation for comparative purposes is 3250 
persons x 30.4 x 99 which equals R 9.8 million 
monthly. 
Therefore, 
in 
reality, 
the 
price 
after 
renegotiations 
represents 
an 
immediate 
decrease 
in 
billing 
of 
R 2.2 
monthly 
of 
R 27 million annually...” 
 
And Chair, you will remember when we spoke 
10 
about this in January 2019, he was going on about how 
famous this was the money making contract of BOSASA.  It 
constituted a small part of their total turnover, number one 
and number two, clearly was not after the renegotiation the 
real money making beast that he spoke about and Chair 
this is merely perusing the facts and the legal documents 
involved.   
“This exercise was performed for the period 
2009 to 2015 when the contract expired and 
demonstrates the true financial saving by the 
20 
Department of Home Affairs over this period 
amounted to R 325 million...” 
 
Chair, a lot of money and table that to prove that 
Chair is on page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   937.  Is that the one? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 107 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja, I think you are right.  That is right, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   937.  I am going to go through it now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   But really it differentiates between what 
the contract was in 2005, what it became after the 2009 
second addendum and it proves beyond any reasonable 
doubt that there were massive savings for the state and for 
the fiscus and hence the awards given to this project 
10 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Well, when you said deposed what 
the contract was in 2005 but I see the table seems to start 
in 2009. 
MR WAKEFORD:   We – Chair, we are starting in 2009 but 
that is when the second addendum was completed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So you get the full benefit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And we demonstrate that over a period 
20 
of six years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   so it was basically halfway through the 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 108 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Taking it to the end of the contract and 
they could have continued with the savings and I do not 
know why but they did not then extent it at their own 
discretion.  They negotiated a new contract.  Now I do not 
know what happened with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, just to get 
onto Radhakrishna.  I am aware that Rahdakrishna himself 
completely denies Agrizzi’s accusation of an agreement 
with BOSASA for the payment of R 7 million regarding the 
10 
Lindela renegotiation.  However, on plain logic, it appears 
that unlikely that a consultant would be rewarded with 
R 7 million having cost them for his so-called corrupt 
tours(?), R 325 million because that is what they did not do 
as a result of the sale. 
“I further provided extracts of the income 
statement and the annual financial statements 
of 
leading 
Prospect 
Trading 
which 
demonstrates that before the renegotiation of 
the contract in 2007, leading Prospect Trading 
20 
earned an annual profit of R 22.6 million. 
After 
renegotiation 
this 
profit 
consistently 
decreased year on year until 2012 and 2013 
when the company actually made losses. 
These financial statements are indicative of 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 109 of 318 
 
the profitability of the Lindela contract as 
leading Prospect Trading was a single purpose 
entity exclusively for the operation of the 
Lindela contract. 
Agrizzi’s representations in paragraph 44.4 of 
his affidavit to the Commission are false in 
their entirety. 
1. He 
say 
the 
Lindela 
contract 
was 
not 
extended for....” 
 
Oh, sorry Chair.  I am not quite sure if this is 
10 
taken from the 417.  Is this taken from the 417? 
COUNSEL:   [No audible reply]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Not.  Thank you.  I will carry on Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
MR WAKEFORD:   “The Lindela contract was not extended  
for five years or at all. 
The contract had already been in place for two 
years prior to this review and thus this did not 
require National Treasury approval as alleged 
by Agrizzi. 
20 
The DHA has already confirmed this to the 
Commission. 
No 
more 
favourable 
contract 
terms 
were 
included in the contract...” 
 
In fact, Agrizzi himself no longer appears to hold 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 110 of 318 
 
this claim and I won’t say why Chair. 
“The effect of the negotiations and review was 
to bring the cost per capita to the department 
to only 35% of the cost per capita of similar 
services provided at private prisons, and there 
are some in South Africa, and the Department 
of Social Services as addressed in the Lindela 
negotiations...” 
 
And it is all attached in the evidence, Chair. 
“As regards paragraph 44.6 of his affidavit or 
10 
Agrizzi’s affidavit which once more refers to 
the extended contract. 
This statement can only be false as confirmed 
above, the contract was not extended. 
Furthermore, 
I 
had 
at 
no 
time 
had 
any 
discussions with Agrizzi about the benefits of 
an extended Lindela contract. 
I 
cannot 
speak 
on 
behalf 
of 
SCOPA 
or 
opposition political parties. 
However, it is only logical to assume that 
20 
anyone would look favourable upon the DHA 
paying less and receiving more as the terms of 
the addendums dictate...” 
 
And Chair, of course, Lindela as a concept or a 
state policy has its opponents.  There are some people 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 111 of 318 
 
who do not believe that you should repatriate and that you 
should detain but in most democracies worldwide there is 
some form of detention and repatriation unless you are 
declared a refugee.  And as much as people jump up and 
down it is a reality, it is there and we had to deal with that 
police reality.  It is not for state departments to question 
government policies, they just have to implement. 
“It 
is 
important 
to 
note 
that 
Fever 
Tree 
Consultants operate in Home Affairs in a 
supportive capacity. 
10 
They 
performed 
research 
and 
analyses 
followed by specific recommendations. 
As a support consultant working with DHA 
officials, Radhakrishna was only one member 
of a team responsible for negotiating the 
savings. 
All 
statutory 
powers, 
however, 
remained 
vested in their accounting authority being the 
director general and his subordinates in terms 
of the respective delegations of authority for 
20 
the necessary approvals including procurement 
and contract. 
Significant 
outcomes 
from 
the 
turnaround 
included reduced turnaround times for identity 
documents and for passports...” 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 112 of 318 
 
 
And the customer centre, Chair, that answered 
95% of calls in 20 seconds and resolved 90% of calls on 
first contact.  I do not know what the situation is now and 
we have always spoke about making the transformation 
stick but I am sure that if you speak to Home Affairs they 
will give you an idea of what is taking place now. 
“Agrizzi has attempted to manipulate reality in 
suggesting any surreptitious payments were 
made to Radhakrishna by BOSASA. 
Subsequent to the conclusion of the Lindela 
10 
negotiations...” 
 
By the way Chair.  I do have copies of Papadakis 
and 
Radhakrishna’s 
affidavits. 
 
We 
got 
Papadakis’ 
yesterday and Radhakrishna, we will receive permission 
from the work stream to get it directly from him. 
“Radhakrishna 
is 
a 
public 
sector 
finance 
expert and I would imagine it was for this 
reason that Agrizzi approached them in regard 
to sent a proposal on the 8 t h of October 2009, 
detailing the works to be formed and that was 
20 
for a fleet management contract in the Eastern 
Cape 
through 
one 
of 
their 
subsidiaries, 
Operation Phakisa...” 
 
Chair, I am almost finished.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 113 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   “My sole involvement in this process  
was that Agrizzi asked me for input on the 
draft 
proposals 
of 
Kelly 
on 
the 
fleet 
management contract to which I informed him 
that he should counter the offer with more 
favourable terms to BOSASA. 
Regarding Radhakrishna’s later consulting to 
BOSASA one needs to appreciate that an 
independent business consultant enjoys the 
same professional agility that advocates or 
10 
attorneys do and no individual client owns that 
professional perpetuity.  
Agrizzi had suggested that his relationship 
was deliberately hidden by some manner by 
Radhakrishna invoicing BOSASA in the name 
of Distinctive Choice Wines at some later 
stage. 
The Commission, however, has confirmed that 
this only occurred in July 2011 two years after 
Kelly and Radhakrishna’s company already 
20 
invoiced BOSASA directly in November 2009. 
It 
is 
counter-intuitive 
to 
suggest 
that 
a 
relationship would be revealed in plain sight 
only to be hidden two years later...” 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
am 
quickly 
looking 
at 
your 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 114 of 318 
 
submissions.  It looks like they would just be a repetition 
of what you have already said so far, at least in 9, page 
942, is that not so? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, Chair.  Do you want me to 
continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I am saying that I am briefly 
looking at your brief submissions ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at the end and it looks like they will 
just be a repetition of what you have said. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I only looked at 942 and if they were 
going to be just a repetition, maybe you should not deal 
with them but you can round off. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I am happy to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   ...to end off. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To round off. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And just to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   ...just based on the evidence in relation 
to SARS, there was no investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, if you ask me because I saw 
Papadakis’ statement yesterday for the first time. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 115 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR WAKEFORD:   My sole role in assisting Papadakis in 
2008/2009 was because he was building a house.  It was 
prior to the World Cup.  There was a shortage of cement, 
and if you are building a house and not a factory or a 
shopping centre, you get pushed to the back of the queue.  
And as I understand it, he had meetings with the Watson’s 
and he contacted me.   
 
I thought that they had shares in AfriSam, so 
they could get it much cheaper.  Clearly, they did not do 
10 
that but I merely referred the builder or the construction 
manager or whatever he is called.  He contacted me.  He 
obviously got my number from Papadakis.  I referred that 
through to Agrizzi and he could have referred that to 
Voster.   
 
From time to time I was phoned to say:  I cannot 
get hold of these guys.  Can you follow up for me?  And I 
did.  There was nothing malicious.  There was no quid pro 
quo.  As far as I understand, he paid for the cement.  It 
was done above board.  Just helping a friend who, in fact, 
20 
was one of the key investigators at the Rand Commission.   
 
And so I have known this man for many years 
and I had the highest respect for him as a man of integrity 
and honour and as a man who has, you know, he was at 
the Rand Commission, he was at the Pillay Commission.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 116 of 318 
 
He has been a variety of commissions and done sterling 
work for this nation and for this country.  And I would not 
never put him in such a compromising position.   
 
In fact, while he was at SARS he did not need 
the BOSASA people, as far as I know.  And yes I did, from 
time to time, visit him unrelated and I never asked him to 
influence a matter within SARS.  And I did not even ask 
him for advice because we had some of the best advisors 
in the country.  You know, Advocate Solomons SC.  We had 
– I mention them in my affidavits.  Some top, top ranking 
10 
people.  So the subsidies was also present.  It was always 
present.   
 
The issue for me was to keep a watching brief on 
threats.  What threats were there, perhaps forces within 
SARS?  Were there forces within the criminal justice 
system?  Were there forces within the media?  Were there 
competitors trying to undermine us?  That was part of my 
brief and I make no bones about that.   
 
I did – I would say to him:  George – if he had 
time to see me, of course.  I often asked for a meeting, I 
20 
never got it.  But I would say:  George, from a process 
viewpoint, you know, administrative justice stuff, how 
should we handle this?  and his – for instance, I think he 
got tired of me because I kept, you know:  Are we not 
under attack here?  Because I did not know a lot of the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 117 of 318 
 
things Agrizzi and his 5 t h Column were doing behind the 
scenes.  I had no clue.   
 
So when we were being attacked like that, I did 
– I felt it incumbent on myself to engage with the different 
players in the market, do some good business intelligence, 
find out what is going on, and to in fact act on that info.  
The letter and Advocate Notshe will show you quite a bit of 
emails and evidence, mostly outside of Papadakis’ tenure 
at SARS.   
 
He will show you stuff but even during his 
10 
tenure, there could be one or two, I do not think so, but 
even during his tenure it was administrative.  You know, 
you got the right to object.  You got the right to appeal.  
Those were the things that I was interested in but more 
importantly.  Why are we being attacked all the time?  And 
I even assisted with a letter which went ...[indistinct] the 
Commissioner of SARS.  Firstly to the acting commissioner 
and then to the commissioner himself.   
 
And apparently, there was a very good meeting 
that resulted from it.  So, Chair I have got nothing to hide.  
20 
I really do not but the fallacious type of content that is 
being alleged against me had to be answered and that is 
why I want to thank you personally for making it possible 
for me to at least have my say today.  Thank you, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Wakeford.  I ended up 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 118 of 318 
 
giving you more than the 15-minutes but I think it is okay.  
You have – I think you have had the opportunity to put your 
side of the story.  We are going to adjourn for lunch now 
but before we do that.  Counsel for Mr Wakeford, I guess 
you will only have an idea of how much time, if any, you 
might need to re-examine after Mr Notshe has finished his 
questioning, I guess? 
ADV REG WILLIS:   Mr Chairman, I gather you are asking 
that question on account of your latter session? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  In the end, I do want to 
10 
make 
sure 
that, 
you 
know, 
everybody 
has 
a 
fair 
opportunity. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   At this juncture ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   ...I do not think it is going to be very 
long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja.  But then see how – what 
comes ...[intervenes]  
ADV REG WILLIS:   It might be 15/20-minutes at this 
juncture. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   Let us see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   So I can give you that indication. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, that is ...[intervenes]  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 119 of 318 
 
ADV REG WILLIS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine.  I wanted to say that my 
experience in this Commission has been over the years 
that the experienced practitioners tend to take shorter on 
re-examination.  [laughs]  So when you say 15-minutes or 
20-minutes, that accord with what I would expect. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  We are going to take the lunch 
adjournment now.  Unfortunately, we – I have got to attend 
to something that relates to the Commission with the result 
10 
that we will not resume at two as we normally would.  We 
will resume at 14:30 so that I can attend to something 
urgent that I need to attend relating to the Commission and 
then we will resume at 14:30 then and then we will 
continue and see how everything goes.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV REG WILLIS:   As you please, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it looks like – ja, at least mine is 
working now. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, mine is also working. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Wakeford, is yours working?  
Okay, alright.  Let us continue. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 120 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   We have reached a truce with my 
learned friends that no – we have reached a truce, no muti, 
which is going to affect the – the muti will [indistinct] but 
must not affect this [indistinct] agreement.  Thank you, 
Chair.  Mr Wakeford, your mic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can keep your mic on throughout, Mr 
Wakeford. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you, Sir. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Let me start with this.  As you know 
the Commission is investigating the issues of state capture 
10 
and corruption and all that.  You understand that and you 
understand that an initiative can start as a good initiative 
with the good intentions but somehow it might be spoilt.  
Do you understand that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I understand that, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And also – I am glad you are talking to 
the Chair although you are referring to me.  And then, Mr 
Wakeford, you also see that the – our constitution really is 
one – it promotes openness and honesty in government 
and including doing business with government. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  Hundred percent, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And I am sure being involved in 
consultation with government departments you know that 
issues look tendering for government are governed by the 
constitution which requires fairness, openness in tendering 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 121 of 318 
 
process. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair, and competition. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And competition, ja.  And if one 
interferes with that it affects issues of competition and 
then the price gets higher for government and it increases 
the expenses, taking the money that have used somewhere 
to somewhere else.  You know that. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, I do. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you know that the influence, what 
is 
also 
being 
investigated 
by 
this 
Commission, 
the 
10 
influence can be obtained in a number of ways.  In a 
number of ways and that influencing decision-makers and 
hoping that decision might be in the favour of whoever 
seeks a favourable decision.  Do you understand that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Hundred percent, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am putting these – I am bringing this 
upfront because of the statements you have made how 
BOSASA starting assisting a true black empowerment 
company and to – just want us to go to some of the 
disturbing features I found and then I want your comment 
20 
on this and we will debate it.   
Now let us start with the issue of Home Affairs.  
Every 
time 
of 
a 
negotiation 
of 
the 
contracts, 
the 
Department of Home Affairs.  At that stage you were the 
adviser to the Minister, am I right?  You were the adviser 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 122 of 318 
 
Minister, is that correct? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Turnaround adviser. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Turnaround adviser.  But at that time 
you were also on retainer of BOSASA. 
MR WAKEFORD:   One hundred percent, fully disclosed, 
Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Was the Minister aware of this? 
MR WAKEFORD:   The Minister was aware. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   That you are on retainer of BOSASA? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Hundred percent. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And the Minister, was she aware of the 
fact that the company you were retained in had a contract 
with her department? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Was she aware that at some stage 
whilst you were turnaround adviser you were on retainer of 
the company that was negotiating the – relooking at the 
contracts with her department? 
MR WAKEFORD:   She must have been aware. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You are not certain? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, who was the Minister again 
at that time? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and that was – she was at that time 
Minister of Home Affairs. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 123 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Nosiviwe, Chair, has no relation with 
me, it is just mine is Viwe.  My name is Viwe, no relations.  
Now, Mr Wakeford, when you look at just at that issue on 
its own, just it not look uncomfortable that you are on 
retainer with a company which has a contract with the 
department in which you are a turnaround adviser. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, if I could respond to that.  Firstly 
to say the period of my involvement with Home Affairs was 
10 
of short duration in comparison with the period that I had 
been with the BOSASA Group albeit that I was – it was a 
small portion of my total time.   
 
In addition to that there is something in governance 
that is called disclosure and recusal.  Both of which were 
applied by myself in four instances.  In fact I was paranoid 
about it and some people even laughed every time I would 
get up and walk out of a room.   
 
So I do not see the - you know, as I spoke earlier, I 
spoke about professional agility, you – and I am sure as 
20 
part of the legal practices, counsel, those are issues that 
would be discussed as well.  There was nothing untoward 
about it whatsoever and understand the turnaround was 
such a big project, a 55 project, seven work streams, you 
know, the renegotiation of contracts was very – it was 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 124 of 318 
 
fractional and I did not participate in this.  So that would 
be my response to that.  Some people may say well, you 
know, but look at the positive contribution that was made in 
terms of, I believe, my leadership at the turnaround and 
look at the positive spinoffs that came from the total 
turnaround [indistinct – dropping voice].  So that is my 
response, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the FeverTree, the company 
FeverTree. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And this company, I understand from 
affidavit of Mr Agrizzi, it was recommended by you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   How did it get to appointed? 
MR WAKEFORD:   FeverTree was on risk when I arrived.  I 
was appointed on the 2 May, they were appointed on the 18 
May.  I arrived, they were there already.  They in fact came 
with very strong recommendation from cabinet and because 
they had foreign exposure to Home Affairs type projects – 
in fact the former Deputy President Ms Phumzile Mlambo-
20 
Ngcuka, she in fact was on the front page I think of the 
Sunday Times just before I arrived to say these are the 
guys.  So my task was to manage and oversee, my task 
was not to decide who.  Thank you, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Tell me, who recommended them to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 125 of 318 
 
cabinet then? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Who recommended them to cabinet? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   FeverTree, ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I cannot answer that.  I cannot 
answer who recommended them to cabinet. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then Mr Anil… 
MR WAKEFORD:   Radhakrishna .. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Radhakrishna . 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Sir. 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
 
Aneel 
Radhakrishna, 
who 
10 
recommended his appointment by FeverTree? 
MR WAKEFORD:   His appointment to FeverTree was 
recommended by myself.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   He was formerly the Chief Operating 
Officer of the ECDC while I was the CEO.  After my 
departure – because remember I appointed him even 
though he was recommended by the board, I had to sign 
his contract.  He was scuppered and he did not have 
anything and he had moved up from Cape Town.  So when 
20 
Sven de Kock, the CEO of FeverTree requested a public 
finance sector expert who was accredited by National 
Treasury, 
I 
recommended 
him 
with 
absolutely 
no 
reservation, in the first instance. 
 
In the second instance, I think it is very important 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 126 of 318 
 
to mention this, that his biggest contribution at Home 
Affairs was to take them from a disclaimer audit to an 
unqualified audit.  That was his intervention, he is 
particularly 
good 
at 
what 
he 
does 
and 
I 
have 
no 
reservations in recommending a man of that capability and 
stature with something like that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now tell me, when you recommended 
him he knew that – you recommended him to FeverTree 
and FeverTree was going to be part of the turnaround 
strategy.  That is correct? 
10 
MR 
WAKEFORD: 
 
 
FeverTree 
had 
a 
variety 
of 
subcontractors, 
one 
of 
which 
was 
Akhile 
being 
the 
company that Aneel Radhakrishna  worked for.  FeverTree, 
as I understood them, firstly they had a large international 
contingent from abroad who were home affairs experts and, 
in the second instance, they had a very, very small in fact 
local contingent, a core, and then they would bring in 
specialists as they required. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now just tell me, did you 
disclose to FeverTree and the department that the Aneel 
20 
recommending was someone you had worked with before? 
MR WAKEFORD:   In fact I disclosed it fully both to Sven 
de Kock and to the Minister and Sven de Kock did his own 
interrogation and assessment of the individual concerned. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 127 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now tell me, did you not deem 
it necessary that you should warn them against involving 
Mr Radhakrishna  in negotiating with BOSASA because you 
are on retainer in BOSASA. 
MR WAKEFORD:   But how does that impact, Chair, I am 
just trying to understand?  He is dealing with that project. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Okay. 
MR WAKEFORD:   He is part of a team, he has no power 
because he is a consultant.  Remember, the consultants 
were support people, they were very, very good at what 
10 
they did and they did all the analyses and made the 
recommendations but he no power to sign off anything. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand.  But do you understand 
that he, while he is recommended by you and now he is 
negotiating with a company wherein – that has retained 
you, does that not look uncomfortable?  You recommended 
him but now he is sitting and negotiating with a company 
that retained you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Look, if I were in the mix of it, if I were 
in the mix of it, I would feel very uncomfortable, but I was 
20 
not in the mix of it at all and he was probably the best 
person to save Home Affairs R325 million over the last six 
years of the contract.  He was by far the most experienced 
person to do that and he can attest to it as others on the 
project and you are welcome to speak to the likes of Roelf 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 128 of 318 
 
Meyer, to Sven de Kock, to the shareholders even of 
FeverTree.  There was absolutely no influence garnered 
from me whatsoever. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now you saw the affidavit or 
you must have of Mr Agrizzi when he responded to the 
affidavit of Aneel Radhakrishna . 
MR WAKEFORD:   I fleetingly had a look at it last night, 
yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And he deals at length with the 
negotiations and his conclusion is that there was no 
10 
savings.  Instead, there was some profit hidden by 
BOSASA.  So there was an expense instead by the 
department.  Did you see that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Look, whether I saw it or not, the fact 
that he says there was no profit speaks to the fact – 
speaks to the fact that their revenue stream was dropping 
as a result of a very good deal negotiated by Home Affairs. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:    But he  - sorry. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, Chair.  So I am not quite sure 
where we are going with this, Chair, but I am quite happy 
20 
to continue responding. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Where I am going with this, he says 
although on the face of it, it looks as if there was no profit, 
there were hidden costs that were put in by BOSASA, but it 
cost the department more.  So BOSASA made more money. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 129 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, with all due respect, with all due 
respect, he has proven to be a liar and he is lying again 
and he is repeating [indistinct] and old stuff.  He needs to 
prove – if he says that after the negotiation they made 
more money, then he needs to say how and why. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, let us try and do that.  Perhaps 
let us try and understand it.  Can you look at the big file 
you have? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sure. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Can you go to page 760? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   760? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the beginning of his affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Chair, can I just stop there, 
something I forgot and wanted to deal with it when we 
come back, before we go any further.  Do you have 760?  
That is the beginning of – there is something I forgot, I 
should have dealt with it.  Do you confirm that the affidavit 
we dealt with before the lunch adjournment, that affidavit 
and annexures is your affidavit.  Remember the affidavit 
20 
you were reading from? 
MR WAKEFORD:   My affidavit? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, the last affidavit. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, it was a consolidated affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 130 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Dating everything and putting it 
together. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And if you just go back to that 
affidavit, I think it is in the small file.  On page 944. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, do you want to do it properly, Mr 
Notshe, because I think I know what you forgot. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Start at the beginning where the affidavit 
starts and then go to – before you go to the last page. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, it is – Mr Wakeford, can we start 
10 
on page 852? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Page 852? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Top right or left? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Always the black numbers. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Black numbers. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, 8…? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   852. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And if you go to 853 and your name – 
do you see your name appearing there? 
MR WAKEFORD:   853.  Yes, I have got you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now put your finger there and then go 
to 945. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 131 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   945? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   945.   
MR WAKEFORD:   945, left hey? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Left, ja.  Always left, the black 
numbers. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, 944, sorry. 
MR WAKEFORD:   944? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, got it. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   There is a signature there, is that your 
signature? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now do you confirm that this document 
I have referred you starting from 852 to 944, 945 is your 
affidavit? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And do you confirm that the affidavit – 
sorry, there are annexures to that affidavit and they form 
part of it.  The annexures that go with it form part of it. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you.  It is a formal exercise to 
demonstrate that this is your affidavit. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Oh, okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ja, it is just an exercise to – just to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 132 of 318 
 
confirm that that is your affidavit.  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you must still request that be 
admitted, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh, sorry.  Chair, can we have the 
affidavit of Mr Kevin Wakeford admitted as EXHIBIT T33? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Exhibit? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   T33. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Kevin Peter Edwin 
Wakeford starts at page 852 will be admitted as an exhibit 
and will be marked as EXHIBIT T33. 
10 
AFFIDAVIT 
OF 
KEVIN 
PETER 
EDWIN 
WAKEFORD 
STARTING AT PAGE 852 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT T33 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now, Mr Wakeford, 
let us go to the affidavit of Mr Agrizzi that we started on. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Page number?  Oh, we were there.  
Okay, got it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is under what divider, Mr Notshe?  I 
had it earlier. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is under 8, divider 8. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now just turn to page 770.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So 770.  Where Mr Agrizzi – now he 
deals with the issue of whether the contract was – cost the 
department more and was lucrative to BOSASA.  He says 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 133 of 318 
 
this.  He denies – he says: 
“I deny allegations……[intervenes] 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, sir, 770, hey? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   770, paragraph 26. 
MR WAKEFORD:   26, hey?  Thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Are you there?  Now if you look at 
paragraph 26.2, Chair, he says: 
“The 
turnaround 
– 
turnover 
billing 
pre 
the 
negotiation was approximately R7.8 million with a 
profit margin of 35% on average yielding 22.6 to 2.9 
10 
per month.” 
You hear that.  But he says then: 
“Post the negotiations the turnaround would drop to 
7.5 …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The turnover. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry. 
“…the turnover would drop to 7.5 but because…” 
This is important, Mr Wakeford, but he says: 
“…but because of reduced occupancy levels and 
reduced costs related to the operation thereof, the 
20 
profit margin increased between 55% and 61% 
yielding an average and net profit contribution on 
average between 4.1 to 4.3 per month.” 
Do you see that?  What do you say to that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I do not believe it.  Firstly, I do not 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 134 of 318 
 
believe it, Chair.  And secondly, I think if there is dispute 
around the figures, I think there should be a proper 
forensic and everyone should have access to that forensic 
report, something we have asked for repeatedly and we 
have never received and we are told that there is no report 
anymore and I do not understand that because it quoted at 
length in the preliminary.   
 
But secondly, let me say, Chair, that the task team 
at Home Affairs, as I understand, were tasked with 
reducing a burden to the fiscus.  Whether Mr Agrizzi and 
10 
his cohorts were making a profit or not, quite frankly, 
anyone running a business without a profit should not be in 
business but whether they were making a profit or not or 
more profit, quite frankly has nothing to do with us.  What 
is important was we were charged with a duty, as a 
turnaround, to become more efficient as a department, 
which we did in terms of turnaround of IDs and passports.   
 
But secondly, on this specific project, which was 
one of 55, we were tasked with getting better service 
efficiency, in the first instance.  And, in the second 
20 
instance, we were required to reduce the burden on the 
fiscus. 
 
Now 
the 
escalation 
and 
numbers 
of 
people 
attending or becoming residents at a repatriation centre is 
not determined by government or the private sector.  Quite 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 135 of 318 
 
frankly, it is determined on how many migrants are 
confronted by the authorities and taken to the repatriation 
centre and that is usually a duty discharged by the police 
and immigration control, that is it.   
 
But to advocate that they negotiated a better deal 
for themselves when we have gone at great lengths to 
prove that in fact the benefits were miniscule and in fact in 
other documents, Agrizzi, Agrizzi himself, says it was 
about the extension of the contract.  It was not about 
economic benefits.  But hopefully we will get a ruling on 
10 
that very soon so we can have that evidence disclosed. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So tell me, Mr Wakeford, so your 
answer to this, you are say well, it is difficult for you as 
you sitting there to dispute what he says unless there is a 
forensic investigation on it.  Is that your answer? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, Mr …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He says he does not believe it. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I do not believe it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He does not believe it. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I do not believe it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it should be investigated and 
everybody should see what comes out, so… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I think that is your prerogative. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so …[intervenes] 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 136 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   As a Commission.  If you want to do 
that.  My view is if you investigate our figures that we have 
given you and go through them carefully I have no reason 
to believe that our figures are wrong.  In fact my forensic 
accountant, one of the best in the country, and he went 
through this with a toothcomb and I cannot believe that Mr 
Agrizzi has any accounting service.  I cannot believe that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You see, this goes further on the same 
page, paragraph 26.4, he says this: 
“In order to disguise the actual profits from the 
10 
directors 
and 
the 
department, 
Watson 
created 
ingenuous ways to dilute the profits by raising 
intercompany charges from nonperforming entities 
and therefore profits in high value contracts such as 
Lindela were diluted so that although the contracts 
were negotiated and clients requested to see the 
financials, the actual profits were not reflected.  
These were fictitious costs relating to the following:   
Security costs, whereas security was provided by 
employees on the payroll.   
20 
Rentals were exorbitantly charged by BOSASA 
properties, management fees as well as software 
costs were built by the holding company.   
Various other costs were interposed on leading 
prospects trading it to disguise actual profit.  This 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 137 of 318 
 
was also done with other projects so that the actual 
profits were diluted excessively.” 
What is your comment to that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, firstly, let me reiterate and 
repeat – and I understand Advocate Notshe has to do his 
job and he has been given something and he must ask 
these questions but with all due respect to the author of 
this document – now the author firstly ignores the fact that 
Home Affairs are not interested in what profits are being 
made, Home Affairs are interested in what service has 
10 
been provided and at what cost and whether they have 
sufficient flexibility in their budget to do a [indistinct] for 
more pressing needs and issues and the savings to Home 
Affairs from a fiscal viewpoint, R325 million.  Now whether 
Mr Agrizzi – he says it is Mr Gavin Watson’s ingenuous 
abilities.  Well, let me tell you, I do not know whether Mr 
Gavin Watson ever read this contract and whether he was 
involved in it at all and if one probably goes back, it is 
highly likely that it was Mr Agrizzi himself, that is why he 
seems to know so much about the underworld of these 
20 
machinations.  But for me to concede to him on the basis 
of just a statement like that would be grossly negligent 
save to say that yes we did put in the financial statements 
to show that over time there was a shrinking of the profit 
margin, but if Mr Agrizzi says those – all those documents 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 138 of 318 
 
were in fact cooked or tampered with at the time, at that 
point in time.   
I cannot give a counter proposal to him because he 
was probably the person that did it, but other than to say 
that Home Affairs is not interested in whether you are 
making a profit or not, they are interested in saving money 
and they did save money, plenty of it.    
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So the high water mark, can someone 
get some water?  
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry Chair my mouth is very dry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well they must give you two bottles 
then. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no four Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But we know Mr Notshe that this has got 
nothing to do with your questions because even before 
lunch 
it was like this. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I know. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No Chair, but Chair no it was long, it 
took longer for him to finish the bottle before lunch. Now, 
20 
one, after two questions he finished the whole bottle.  Now 
Mr Watson, the…[intervene] 
MR WAKEFORD:   Wakeford, sorry Chair, some people do 
call me, Kevin Watson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 139 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   You know; I literally grew up with the 
family.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No sorry, sorry. 
MR WAKEFORD:   It does not matter it was a Freudian 
slip, Advocate Notshe, I do not mind.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I have fallen into the same thing I 
have been called Viwe Freeway and all.  Now Mr Wakeford 
your case and your evidence is this that whatever - 
however the – however BOSASA reached the pricing they 
reached it did not matter.  What matters is that the 
10 
department made a savings, that is your high watermark. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, sir, yes Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now I want to take you to page 779. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Paragraph 43.3, Chair I am not going 
to read this because again, here Mr Agrizzi is showing 
how, despite the price event, how BOSASA managed to get 
to that but still make a profit.  It almost – its building Chair 
on what I have already asked.  So I do not want to delay by 
reading the whole paragraph but you are saying whatever 
20 
calculations are here, the fact of the matter is that the 
department felt that they have made a savings, is that your 
answer? 
MR WAKEFORD:   That the department did make savings 
as attested to in their annual reports, Chair and as 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 140 of 318 
 
attested to even to presentations to the Home Affairs 
Committee in Parliament, SCOPA etcetera.  It was very 
evident that they were saving money. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then also if you turn to page 783. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair 783 sorry, I have gone one 
too many, there we go. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   There on paragraph 49 Mr Agrizzi 
would – whereas if you go to paragraph on page 784 over 
the page paragraph 49.3.  He says: 
“On average Lindela would reflect the low profit to 
10 
appease the Department of Home Affairs for the 
Auditor General should they invoke the decision to 
evaluate the financials of leading prospect trading. 
However, the actual profits generated by Lindela 
were 
in 
excess 
of 
4.5 
per 
month 
post 
the 
negotiations. Hence, it remains a very lucrative 
contract and very little risk.” 
Your answer is still the same as you gave. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, my response would be beyond 
that. It would be very interesting to see if this is in fact 
20 
true how the honourable Agrizzi would prove it in the first 
instance, but he seems to be aware of inter account – let 
us call it an inter account fraud perhaps that is what he is 
referring to.  I am not aware of anything like that but let me 
say this, that they reflected very good profits prior to this 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 141 of 318 
 
contract, and the two addendums, especially the two 
addendums and as the years went on their profits dipped 
massively, eventually running at a loss.  
Now, that is what they provided the auditors. Those 
financial statements were audited but who knows what Mr 
Agrizzi was up to at the time, Chair I don’t.  I was not there 
to witness it, I was not there but let me say this, I am 
confident that Home Affairs was saving every single month. 
DV NOTSHE SC:   Whether you are saying, whether what 
Mr Agrizzi says how they managed to get a profit is correct 
10 
or not. You are unable to say anything we said, toward[?] 
[06;04]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You know, I visited Lindela as a young 
consultant when I first started in 2006.  I think it was 2000, 
yeah 2006 I have popped in there and a look and that is 
the only time I actually got involved with Lindela directly 
but safe to say that Home Affairs and if you speak to Home 
Affairs.  The vast majority of people who I had dealings 
with were quite satisfied with the service that we getting.  
And they came in well below, well below private 
20 
prisons, well below social development, for youth hostels, 
etcetera, etcetera.  So I am - you know, this top team of 
consultants, mostly many from overseas, and they did not 
have too much negative to say about it.  All they did was to 
cut the price and to slash it from an annual budget spend 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 142 of 318 
 
perspective and the budgets spend did drop.  No one, not 
even the Auditor General would contest that, so I am not 
quite sure where Agrizzi is going with this or perhaps it 
reflects an ineptitude on his part, I am not sure. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Look, look when you look at it, when 
he says look we went in, we negotiated with someone 
brought in by Mr Gavin Watson, someone brought in by Mr 
Gavin Watson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you will remember Mr Notshe that, I 
have said that the Evidence Leader who gets the witness 
10 
name wrong three times, to be fined. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, this is my first time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the second time. [laughing]   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ja, I am going to bite my tongue.  Mr 
Wakeford remember his premise is this that we heard Mr 
Wakeford on a retainer, Mr Wakeford is an advisor on the 
turnaround strategies by Home Affairs.  We have a contract 
with Home Affairs, we negotiate with someone brought by 
Mr Wakeford, no sorry let me rephrase that. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Recommended by Mr Wakeford and on 
that basis we made more profits than we have been 
making, does it not look bad? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, firstly, I will reiterate the CO of 
FeverTree would have had to satisfy himself.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 143 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The, sorry? 
MR WAKEFORD:   The CEO of FeverTree appointed Achille 
not a new directing Achille had variety of consultants and 
staff members.  They specialised in public sector finance 
mainly as I understood it.  They quite frankly Chair he and 
his 
team 
had 
to 
satisfy 
themselves 
that 
Aneel 
Radhakrishna was the right representative and that Achille 
was the right company. 
I could not interfere in that, I could only recommend 
and I stand by my original response truth response 
10 
because many would deny it, but not me I tell you the 
truth.  He was selected by the FeverTree consultants and I 
see absolutely nothing wrong with a person who I by the 
way had no direct influence or control over.  He was 
reporting to the CO and I had recused myself from all those 
processes. 
So for the life of me, I cannot understand why his 
trying to draw a bridge or a nexus where I would in the 
dark shadows of Home Affairs tried to influence something 
like this, when I was being measured by the Minister and 
20 
the DG and their team on overall performance of a much 
bigger turnaround project than procurement renegotiations. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see, you see what is also disturbing 
is the fact that BOSASA goes and pays Mr Radhakrishna – 
not personally, but in some company, wine company. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 144 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   May I respond to that Chair?  Well, 
firstly, I think it is important that at some stage, you have a 
closer look at Aneel Radhakrishna’s affidavit and then what 
I say in mine as well, but safe to say the first – and I spoke 
about it this morning.  
The first payment made to him, according to his 
affidavit was near the end of 2009 for his involvement with 
fleet management contract in the Eastern Cape and there I 
also spoke about the agility of consultants that no one 
owns them.  They can move around and be hired gun for 
10 
almost anybody as some lawyers are but Chair as far as I 
understand it and you will have to…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But hang on, are you saying anything 
about your counsel? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Well his fairly universal Chair, Chair the 
– you know it is an important question, even though it is I 
think two to three years after I had left and Aneel 
Radhakrishna left a bit after me.  I am not quite sure 
exactly when but it was an extended period of time after 
we both left Home Affairs and I think Agrizzi took quite a 
20 
liking to this guy and had used him in a variety of 
capacities, as an external consultant.  
The nature of that relationship I cannot comment on 
because I was not close to it but merely to say this that if 
you read his affidavit, his responses that he was - he did 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 145 of 318 
 
not want to share his consulting activity on that particular 
project in 2012, whenever it was with Achille because he 
put all the work and effort into it himself and therefore he 
responded in that manner.  
Once 
again, 
that 
is 
for 
the 
Commission 
and 
yourselves to decide as to how you see that, whether you 
know more than I do but for all intents and purposes, I 
think it was a natural business response to doing work 
outside of the scope of other shareholders in another 
partnership.  
10 
I do not see it as - because he already accepted a 
payment in Achille in 2009.  So why would he - he would be 
open about it today and he would hide about it two years 
later when it had absolutely nothing to do with the Home 
Affairs contract, I do not understand it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You see what is – what I find 
disturbing personally, is that if the payment was made to 
Mr Radhakrishna, Aneel Radhakrishna I will be standing on 
my two hind legs in talking to you about this issue but it is 
made to some wine company and he does not come and 
20 
say I had sold wine to BOSASA.  He says there were some 
services but he speak to a wine company, which he did not 
do business. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yeah, Chair I do not want to get into a 
deep dive on this because I think it is incumbent on Aneel 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 146 of 318 
 
Radhakrishna to respond to things like this. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No I accept that. 
MR WAKEFORD:   But other than to say this, that if you 
buy a shelf company, you know, some of them are called 
giraffe others are called elephant, others are called 
whatever.  This one was called Distinctive Choice, it never 
traded in wine as I understand it.  It is a shelf company, 
they threw some shareholders in they have not changed 
the name yet, I do not know.  
But those are the questions I would ask, those are 
10 
the questions I would ask of Aneel Radhakrishna and what 
am what was the purpose of the company?  What was it 
geared for?  What was the intent behind it and why did you 
not invoice through Achille? 
His response, as I said, I have read his affidavit.  
His response is very clear that he just needed a vehicle 
outside of Achille, because he did not want to share in that 
turnover, because he did all the work by himself. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And lastly on this, again, understand 
me I am not expecting you to answer for Mr Radhakrishna 
20 
but just putting what looks…[intervene] 
MR WAKEFORD:   What I think.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yeah, and what looks strange and also 
the other payments, I think two payments were made to his 
wife for having rendered services.  It all looks as if some 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 147 of 318 
 
money is being hidden, does it not? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Look, why would you want to hide 
money so long after a contract?  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I have got no – then lastly – sorry it is 
the second last, well last, last.  Remember Mr Agrizzi’s 
was evidence is that Mr Aneel Radhakrishna wanted 
R7million and he was laughed off and they started to pay 
him in some instalments and in some instances, he says 
instead of paying you they paid him. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I see that. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I see that Chair, in Mr Agrizzi’s new 
admission, his new admission because his story keeps 
changing.  I am not quite sure which one to believe but 
other than to say that sorry, Chair, could I just ask 
advocate not Chair to repeat question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no the issue the issue I was 
raising is that he - I think two payments were paid to his 
wife who had not turned that services. 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, that demands a response from 
him himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now let us move from that, that was 
the Home Affairs. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 148 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the issue about Mr Papadakis. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Let me first before I asked further 
questions about it.  Mr Papadakis has refused for now to 
give an affidavit regarding his involvement in BOSASA and 
SARS he says the Administration Act refuses him to do 
that, prohibits him from doing that but fortunately, the 
liquidators seem to agree that we can get that, to allow him 
to give us information of what he did regarding BOSASA 
10 
when he was at BOSASA.  
I am just putting it to you, to let you know.  Now let 
us take the evidence is that the affidavit of Mr Agrizzi is 
that Mr Papadakis was compensated with wet and dry 
cement.  You saw that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I saw that Chair, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you agree that you did that to 
facilitate the cement to be delivered at Mr Papadakis’s   
place, am I right? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay, Chair I want to - I do not want to 
20 
say yes or no, I want to give a bigger a better response on 
that.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR WAKEFORD:   Firstly, let me say this that the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 149 of 318 
 
allegation is that he managed BOSASA problems internally 
in 
BOSASA 
and 
for 
that, 
for 
a 
major 
investigation 
apparently, he was reimbursed with wet and dry.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   That is the allegation, we know from the 
investigators reports, the prelim in particular and other 
evidence through other affidavits from people at RGS as 
well as at the other supplier I forget the name now, Chair.
 
That they do not agree with either Vorster or 
Agrizzi’s quantities and that the quantities were far, much 
10 
smaller and they were during January to June, I think 2009 
that was the period and it was a period where there was 
no, whatsoever no major investment.  
So, Chair, that is - I think that is an important 
context before we take it further.  Papadakis as far as I am 
know is a friend of certainly some of the Watson brothers, 
he did not know Gavin at all but he did know, Ronnie in 
particular and he had met me at the Rand Commission, he 
was the lead investigator so he had to interview me a few 
times and he also met Ronnie Watson subsequent to the 
20 
Commission.  
And Chair, this is I think 14 or 13 years ago, so I 
am going to - and I only saw Papadakis thing yesterday his 
affidavit but it is safe to say this that there was Ronnie and 
George Papadakis had met. Ronnie's one of his companies 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 150 of 318 
 
was involved in the cement sector in the Eastern Cape, 
George Papadakis had expressed frustration around the 
activities of cement supplied that time because of the 
World Cup, and they were massive infrastructure projects 
all over and Ronnie could not respond because for some 
reason, I think their company was no longer involved in 
cement by the time request had come through and a phone 
call came through to me because Ronnie referred the 
phone call to me because at least I knew Gavin and 
Papadakis did not.  
10 
And I spoke to Agrizzi and I said, here I the builder 
you guys carry on with that, so it was, as far as I can 
ascertain, it was an innocent transfer of relationship 
knowledge to say, here is a need, here is a potential 
supplier at that time BOSASA was involved with Afrisam 
and one of the empowerment partners, and the purchase 
from 
another 
major 
international 
company 
called 
Wholesome.  
But the long and the short of it is if you look at the 
evidence here, the suppliers were actually external to 
20 
BOSASA and the long and the short of it is that a payment 
was made.  I do not have all the details of that, but I am 
sure that you can get that directly from Mr Papadakis 
himself. 
But yes there was a supplier, it was not a quid pro 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 151 of 318 
 
quo type situation, as I understand it, it was a simple, here 
and let us help and assist.  And the builder dealt directly 
with a company and the company facilitated because 
obviously they were probably – BOSASA was a large 
company in those days so they had some sway over the 
supplier.  That is all I have to say about that Chair.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Look, let us take Mr Wakeford let us 
take this step by step. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Did you not want to be cautious about 
10 
saying there was no investigation by SARS on BOSASA at 
the time of the cement issue.  You do not know much of 
what was being investigated by SARS or do you? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Well, to my knowledge Chair, I mean, I 
am not - I never worked for SARS but to my knowledge 
there was no - what is an investigation?  An investigation 
is where you receive an audit letter and then the audit 
commences. 
In this case, the audit letter was near the end of 
2010 and the initiation of the audit and if I am not 
20 
mistaken, it was Pezulu[?] one of the subsidiaries involved 
in fencing although the word means sky if I am not 
mistaken.  
So yes Chair the - no knowledge at all, the only 
knowledge I have of an investigation was the one I have 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 152 of 318 
 
just mentioned and there would never have been a quid pro 
quo type relationship with Mr George Papadakis. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you know, whether BOSASA or 
subsidiary companies had put in a claim, a tax refund 
claim, you know about those things? 
MR WAKEFORD:   A tax refund? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, you do not know about those 
things. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Is that an investigation, chair?  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am asking the issues about SARS, 
10 
you know whether they would have claimed a tax refund, 
you do not know that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I would not know about that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am not expecting it from you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Hence I say Mr Wakeford the high 
watermark is that as far as you are concerned, you do not 
know whether there were any investigation or tax to file 
applications by BOSASA at that time, a high watermark. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Are you referring sir to Chair to 2000 
20 
January to June 2009? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   From 2009 until 2013 when Mr George 
Papadakis left. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, no you cannot refer to that area, 
Chair let me tell you why because the allegation is very 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 153 of 318 
 
specific.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And if you read Agrizzi’s allegation, he 
says very clearly that there was a major investigation 
number one, and as a compensation for that investigation 
it must have been prior to February or January 2009.  It 
must have been prior to that because he was reimbursed 
for his efforts, according to him.  Chair, I somehow do not 
understand why would one bring anything in excess of that 
allegation into it, even Frans Voster speaks to it. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So is it your evidence then, that you 
are saying with certainty that there was no investigation by 
SARS at the time that there was a cement issue, is that 
your evidence? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Please repeat? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is it your evidence that you are saying 
now with certainty that there was no investigation by SARS 
on BOSASA or its subsidiaries during the time of cement 
issue.  
MR WAKEFORD:   100%. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see; now only cement you know who 
paid for the cement? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, my understanding is that 
Papadakis as builder paid BOSASA directly. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Your lawyers must have informed you, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 154 of 318 
 
must have shown you that BOSASA paid for it, for the 
cement. 
MR WAKEFORD:   From the supplier but you paid 
BOSASA. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   BOSASA paid the supplier of cement. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And you paid BOSASA, who paid 
BOSASA Chair?  In other words, when you have got a 
suppler you cannot expect someone else to pay the 
supplier, they are your supplier.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   So the supplier settles, is settled by the 
original client that placed the order and then the company 
that placed the order that has paid for a service that it had 
never got any benefit from then has to pay - then has to be 
paid by the third party. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Then let us use – then let us bee 
direct to this case. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   BOSASA paid for the cement. 
MR WAKEFORD:   BOSASA paid their suppliers and then 
20 
what happened after that, that is my question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well let us take a step by step, at this 
stage the question is do you accept that BOSASA paid the 
supplier? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 155 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you say I accept, it is one scenario.  
You might say no, that is not true, that is another scenario 
or you might say I do not know whether BOSASA paid the 
supplier or not, then we can take it from there. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair, no what has been 
supplied by the investigators and by former employees of 
the [word cut] cement.  There is plenty of reading material 
that speaks to the supply of cement and the payment of 
cement, much smaller quantities within a very limited 
timeframe so the actual amounts and the actual receipts 
10 
need to be – that needs to be dealt with by Papadakis 
because I would not have seen any of that other than what 
has been provided me in this pack.  But the point remains 
that there was some assistance and as far as I understand 
there was payment for it from Papadakis’s builder. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Is your answer therefore that you 
say you – you stood that BOSASA paid the supplier or is the 
position that you accept that BOSASA paid the supplier but 
you are saying that the person who benefitted from the – 
from this refunded BOSASA or – so that in the end BOSASA 
20 
did not lose – use any money in the sense that if it was 
paying for him – if it paid for him and he refunded it? 
MR WAKEFORD:  My understanding Chair was that the 
builder had received the cement on site, paid for the cement 
at some stage.  I do not know when – those things need to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 156 of 318 
 
be determined by other parties not by me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Okay alright. 
MR WAKEFORD:  But I did – I did pass on the details to – 
or the builder to BOSASA and there was – there was 
definitely some communication because I was phoned once 
or twice to say I cannot get hold of these guys what is going 
on?  And I made a phone call that is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But as we speak as you are sitting there 
you must have seen – you must have seen proof of payment 
10 
of the cement by BOSASA and the supplier of cement you 
must have seen it?  The 00:02:39 must have shown you 
that. 
MR WAKEFORD:  In these packs? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes absolutely I saw it in these packs. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And I am sure – but you will – there is a 
lot of paper here – I am sure you have not seen proof of 
payment by Papadakis’ builder; the supplier of cement or 
did you? 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  No.  No I have not .. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  For this commission is (talking over one 
another) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let him finish. 
MR WAKEFORD:  He has only sent one affidavit in which 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 157 of 318 
 
was last year, which I only saw yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – okay – you… 
MR WAKEFORD:  So for me to comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have not had enough time. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Ja but – but that is really for not – not for 
me to respond to or to validate or verify.  That is for the 
commission to establish the payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes – from your side obviously you only 
say what you know. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What you do not know you do not know. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes Chair and I am trying to do that to 
the best of my ability. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that it is fine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Let us deal with what you do not know.  
You do not know whether the builder paid cement supplier; 
that you do not know. 
MR WAKEFORD:  That – no Chair I did not work for the 
builder so I heard that the builder had paid.  That is all I 
heard. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But what you know today is that 
BOSASA paid the supplier. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Paid the original supplier. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The cement supplier. 
MR WAKEFORD:  What – what needs to be verified is who 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 158 of 318 
 
at BOSASA received the refund if at all.  Who received it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And again, what you do not know is 
whether there is a refund to BOSASA. 
MR WAKEFORD:  (talking over one another) 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You did not come across anything to 
that effect? 
MR WAKEFORD:  No Chair to – you know when you are told 
by somebody that no it was paid – it was settled – it was 
refunded I – who am I to get involved or to dispute that?  I 
cannot.  I must … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  I must allow yourselves to establish the 
facts.  That is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes from your side you – you can say this 
is what I was told. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I have no personal knowledge whether 
it is true or not. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Hundred percent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I believed it – if you believed it.  
20 
Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now as we sit today – as we are sitting 
today, we have this situation that we have Mr Papadakis 
who is working at SARS at the time and his cement 
requirements is paid for by BOSASA.  A taxpayer who had a 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 159 of 318 
 
query – it was queried by SARS that is the situation we 
have today.  Am I right? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Just repeat the last part of it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  As we are sitting here today. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We are sitting here today what we have 
is this that we have a person who was working for SARS – 
Mr Papadakis his cement requirement was paid for by 
BOSASA.  BOSASA a taxpayer who was under investigation 
by SARS that is what we have today, am I right? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:  Under investigation by SARS where – 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think your answer would be I do 
not know anything about an investigation if that is the case. 
MR 
WAKEFORD: 
 
To 
my 
knowledge 
there 
was 
no 
investigation at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  No investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the balance of what Mr Notshe is 
saying what do you say to that?  You do not know anything 
20 
about the investigation but the balance of what you are 
saying you have no issues with namely a taxpayer namely 
BOSASA who had a query – a tax query or is it – was it a 
tax query? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  A tax query or a refund application. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 160 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair – Chair could I just respond to 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Because  
CHAIRPERSON:  Respond to that. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Because one has got to be very careful 
the allegation was major investigation and at that time there 
was – there was compensation.  In other words, there was a 
corrupt act and we all know the period.  We must be careful 
10 
not to start talking about other things because no one has 
ever spoken about that before.  No one has ever alleged 
that there was a tax refund.  No one has refuted the fact 
that there was no investigation at the time.  Now we – we 
getting into another – it is another chapter that quite frankly 
I am not sure whether I should – I can even comment on it 
because when you start talking refunds it was never 
alleged. When you start talking there was this quiet 
investigation, 
I 
do 
not 
know 
if 
there 
was 
a 
quiet 
investigation or not.  What I do know what that which is in 
20 
the public domain there was nothing.  And one would even 
question whether Papadakis knew it was being supplied by 
BOSASA or not because the communication was initially 
with Ronnie Watson he was trying to deal with the company 
that Ronnie was dealing with that had cement and by the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 161 of 318 
 
way Ronnie is a taxpayer as well.  Everyone is a taxpayer.  
If you are not a taxpayer then you should not be a citizen 
quite frankly unless you unemployed or no – or no reason 
that – for – a lot of people are unemployed because they 
cannot help it but if you are working then you should be a 
taxpayer and the company should be a taxpayer as well.  
But – but to try and – to try and say that a taxpayer who is 
assisting someone working at SARS is – has created a 
naturally corrupt relationship I do not know – I have a bit of 
a problem with that interpretation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe Mr Notshe start with the 
question of the investigation now because I do seem to 
think there may have been reference to it by either Mr 
Agrizzi or by some other witness. So maybe it is better if 
you start by clearing that issue whether there was evidence 
to that effect. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair in –  
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we take it from there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair in fairness to Mr Wakeford the 
issue of the existence of the investigation or not I am not 
20 
going to delve into that.  What I want to find out from Mr 
Wakeford  we are talking. 
ADV WILLIS:  Sorry Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:  Can I come in there and I… 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 162 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:  I just feel very reluctantly and I have been 
very patient and I believe I have given my learned friend 
some – a lot of latitude.  But we had to answer the 
allegations that were made to Mr Agrizzi by Mr Agrizzi.  You 
have heard from Mr Wakeford there is not a shred of 
evidence to prove anything this man has said.  That is our 
contention that is the case we have argued to you when we 
make our submissions he is giving the evidence.  There – it 
is not for our client to prove a negative.  There is – if there 
10 
is evidence to be put to our client then it must be put to him 
00:10:19 for Mr Notshe to aver now or to submit he is not 
going to deal with that after suggesting there is something 
is not acceptable.  That is what Mr Agrizzi has done.  
Suggestions, cast dispersions but no evidence. If there is 
something else then it must be put to Mr – the heart – the 
evidence – part of the direct evidence must be put to Mr 
Wakeford and he must be given an opportunity to deal with 
even if we must stand down for two minutes to assist him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.   
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I do not – thanks for my learned friend 
to offer for two minutes I do not need it.  I will proceed 
without the two minutes he wants to give me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but it is important just to make sure 
that if there is evidence that you want to put to him to say 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 163 of 318 
 
there is this evidence that it be made clear. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Mr Wakeford I understand – I accept 
that I cannot expect you to respond on evidence which is 
not there on which you do not know about.  Let us go back.  
You know now as a fact that BOSASA paid for the cement of 
requirements of Mr Papadakis, you know that.  It is here in 
the document. 
MR WAKEFORD:  I have seen that. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  You do not know whether Mr 
Papadakis refunded BOSASA, you do not know or do you? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Mr Papadakis refunded BOSASA. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ja for the cement they paid for. 
MR WAKEFORD:  No what I… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You do not know that. 
MR WAKEFORD:  I have been told I have not been party to 
the transactions so I would not be able to provide you with 
the necessary evidence.  At the time I do remember the 
builder saying that he had paid or and refunded for all the 
20 
cement.  Whether – and that – that should be a liaison 
between yourselves and the builder and Mr Papadakis. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Who is the builder you talk about? 
MR WAKEFORD:  His name was if I am not mistaken he 
was an indigenous Greek type guy. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 164 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Is that the surname Indigenous? 
MR WAKEFORD:  No, no I am just describing him.  He 
spoke with a broken accent and his – his name was Chris – 
Christos something – Christos. – I do not – I did not know 
him.  I mean the guy phoned me – I put him in touch with 
Agrizzi and that is where my role ended. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Is it in your evidence that there is 
nothing wrong for someone working at SARS to have 
something he needs to be paid for by taxpayers – someone 
working at SARS – you say there is nothing wrong with 
10 
that? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Well firstly Chair if there is no a quit pro 
quo then I mean friends do – this is friends from time to 
time Number 1. 
2. I would say that there is nothing wrong with getting or 
being provided with a service if you pay for that service.  
Now are facts that must be established by this commission 
not by me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:  I am not your investigator. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No I understand.  But if you do not pay 
for the service you still – there is nothing wrong with that? 
MR WAKEFORD:  If you do not pay? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Well I would say then that could become 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 165 of 318 
 
a problem. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  It certainly could 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you would expect that the person 
working for SARS would declare that to SARS – you would 
expect that?  To say whether … 
MR WAKEFORD:  If you do not pay for it absolutely. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
Now 
your 
relationship 
with 
Mr 
10 
Papadakis were you friends? 
MR WAKEFORD:  I would say we were – we were friends. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Was he your advisor? 
MR WAKEFORD:  His nickname – his nickname was my 
Advisor.  Everyone – everyone who is close to me knew that 
Number 1. 
2. That terms Advisor was used well in excess of his 
departure from SARS and I have emails to prove. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And tell me – tell the commission do you 
have his email address? 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:  No.  He worked - you know with 
Papadakis if you wanted to connect with him he had a PA 
called 
Chrisna 
Engelbrecht, 
his 
wife 
and 
Chrisna 
Engelbrecht coordinated his life while he was working at a 
corporate prior to SARS and at SARS as well and post 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 166 of 318 
 
SARS. Up until and Chair I did prepare an affidavit in 
response to Chrisna Engelbrecht but I was asked to 
withhold it until we got all the information.  I know that she 
claims that I was never friendly with her and that we did not 
really have a close relationship well that is not true Chair.  
In fact I was quite fond of her as a person.  Unfortunately, 
their marriage did end and I do not want to get into that.  I 
think it was in 2017 the last time I saw her was at Barry 
Sergeant’s funeral at St John’s College when Barry passed 
away of cancer.  We were both friendly with Barry and 
10 
Chrisna Engelbrecht was at the funeral as well and we 
joined them for some beverages or whatever after the actual 
funeral.  That is the last time I saw her.  But we had – and I 
have got emails to validate it and I will certainly send that 
affidavit in as soon as possible Chair.  It is all ready it just 
needs to be paginated etcetera but the bottom line is there 
– there are numerous emails between myself and Chrisna 
that had nothing to do with George Papadakis where she for 
instance facilitated a dog – an Alsatian for – because I love 
dogs – I assisted her with some visa applications to Home 
20 
Affairs through the VIP unit for a number of their clients at 
the time at Midland Shipping Company there is some others 
as well.  I am not quite sure why she wants to dissociate 
herself from me but my view has always been that she is a 
– she – I considered her to be a friend as well.  So yes I did 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 167 of 318 
 
– I did send emails to her because Papadakis was running 
around all the time. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Do you have any particular reason why 
you did not submit this affidavit in response to her affidavit? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Because… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So the we could see it in time and deal 
with it. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes – sorry Chair in fact Advocate Willis 
can perhaps respond to that. 
ADV WILLIS:  Thank you Mr Chair.  In fact an arrangement 
10 
it is recorded I think maybe just in the moment Mr Notshe is 
just 
– 
it 
slipped 
his 
mind 
but 
there 
is 
a 
lot 
of 
correspondence that records us holding back on things until 
we get in particular the Papadakis affidavit.  It was not so 
much the response by Agrizzi at that time it was the 
Papadakis affidavit and the Radhakrishna.  And – well we 
only got the Papadakis affidavit yesterday morning and the 
Chrisna Engelbrecht affidavit was not required of us and it 
is not there.  But I can confirm it was prepared it just needs 
to be commissioned at some stage 00:18:09.  Thank you. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No Chair I think my learned friend – I do 
not know what he is talking about when he said I do not 
know whether he insinuating that I said there must be a 
delay in submitting a response to Ms Engelbrecht.  There 
was no such an arrangement with him. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 168 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  My understanding is that he is doing 
nothing more than saying you ought to be aware of some 
correspondence about them delaying. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There is no correspondence about 
delaying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you are aware of. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There is no correspondence about 
delaying in submitting a response to Ms Engelbrecht.  The 
delay was only in respect of the affidavit of Mr  
CHAIRPERSON:  Agrizzi. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No Mr Aniel and Mr Papadakis because 
we wanted a response from Mr Agrizzi.  But not Ms 
Engelbrecht there was never an arrangement that they 
would delay.  In any event – in any event by yesterday after 
we left here the arrangement was that they are going to 
respond to everything – they are going to give us a 
comprehensive affidavit of Mr Wakeford. There was never 
an arrangement that something is going to be left out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might wish… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let him respond to that. 
ADV WILLIS:  Mr Chairman there is a 00:19:29 of 
correspondence that deals with these issues.  There were 
also dealings between Mr Notshe and I on a collegial level 
which do not form part of that.  I would like the opportunity 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 169 of 318 
 
to refresh his mind on this particular issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:  So I understand that we – I understand that 
is 00:19:49 that needs to be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:  As to preparing a comprehensive affidavit for 
today he is here to deal – our client is here to deal with the 
allegations by Mr Agrizzi and Mr Vorster.  If there is 
anything else that needs specific dealing with here is the 
opportunity ask him.  He is here to give his evidence.  
10 
Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us say the two of you will talk 
and try to refresh each other’s memory in the meantime I 
am not sure how much material … 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair – no Chair it is this issue is not 
really an issue that can delay us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  All I was putting was just complaining to 
Mr Wakeford that I did not get it in time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It plays a major – a minor role. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But it is part of the whole issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Mr Wakeford you know this is my pause 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 170 of 318 
 
before I call your name I am worried about the fine I do not 
want to – I am left with one strike so I pause before I call 
out your name.  Because if I make a mistake now it will be a 
fine for me.  Now turn to page 657.  Now 657 it is an email 
from you – it an email from you to Ms Engelbrecht and – 
and then you say: 
“Hi Chrisna how are you.  Please see below 
and ask Advisor to comment.” 
You see that? 
MR WAKEFORD:  I see that. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And the Advisor you are referring to is 
Mr Papadakis? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Am I right?  Why do you not say ask Mr 
Papadakis why did you not use his name? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Because that is what I always called him 
in every single email Chair.  Both post and prior.  From 
when I met him right through. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Post – post what? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Post his leaving SARS and prior to him 
20 
going to SARS. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then also… 
CHAIRPERSON:  How did he acquire the nickname? 
MR 
WAKEFORD: 
 
Chair 
he 
is 
a 
– 
he 
is 
a 
very 
knowledgeable man but I also called him a number of other 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 171 of 318 
 
things as well when teasing him.  I called him Zorbo which 
is a name that has an infinity with Greek people as well as I 
think a term the Hellenic because his ancestry is Northern 
Greek where the Hellenic people lived.  But in the main I 
called him Advisor because of his head space and his 
knowledge.  He always has something to offer in terms of 
knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then on page 659 you see the same 
reference to the Advisor. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:  Hundred percent. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And I suppose you have got the same 
explanation? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Same explanation. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Mr Wakeford I would – got 
something which is disturbing here.  I want you to deal with 
it please. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Sure. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Can you turn to page 153. 
MR WAKEFORD:  153. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  153.  Are you there?   
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now paragraph 4.9 – you on 4.9?  This 
is again the affidavit of Agrizzi. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 172 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  When he was responding to your 
application. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He says something which is – we need 
an explanation.  He says: 
“The 
further 
email 
is 
referring 
to 
confectionary” 
I am reading Chair from there. 
“The 
further 
email 
is 
referring 
to 
confectionary and smarties was referring to 
10 
money to be provided to the Minister ’s 
Advisor 
Mike 
Ramagopa 
for 
benefit 
of 
interacting on behalf of BOSASA with the 
Minister Nosiviwe Noltano Mapisa-Nqakula.” 
She was the Minister of – she was the Minister of 
Correctional Services at the time. You used the word 
confectionary which meant money and smarties was the 
nickname you gave for Mike Ramagopa.  The reason for the 
nickname is because he always changed his mind. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair I – I did respond to this in one of 
20 
my prior affidavits. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:  But just to say the following because my 
memory serves me very well on matters like this.  Firstly my 
first response was that I doubt whether the email is 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 173 of 318 
 
authentic because I honestly did not remember that email.  
In fact from a Yahoo address.  Secondly Mike – his name 
Mike Ramagoma he originates from the territory of Venda.  
Mike is a very smart young man who was the advisor to the  
Minister but my relationship with the Minister as a very 
close colleague and friend did not require any interface or 
assistance Mike Ramagoma with all due respect.  And I 
think you have heard in Agrizzi’s testimony and Van 
Tonder’s and others that the term confectionary did not 
refer to money. When they were referring in money in all 
10 
their testimonies, they spoke about I think it was loaves of 
bread – they did not refer to confectionary.  If in fact that 
email is authentic the confectionary probably refers to the 
provision of some form of catering because they always 
spoilt their guests when they arrived at the HQ or the 
premises.  Because Agrizzi prided himself in having some of 
the best chefs in the public – serving the public sector.  And 
it was quite common for them to bake and to provide guests 
with eats.  But Chair I did not require any services from 
Mike Ramagoma.  My relationship with the Minister was a 
20 
direct. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Look he – he attaches – Agrizzi 
attaches two emails – copies of emails you must have seen 
them. 
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 174 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It is on page 223.   
MR WAKEFORD:  Yes.  Sorry his – Chair just to clarify this.  
His – Agrizzi’s second affidavit that was never presented 
where he introduces a whole lot of new – probably because 
his previous stuff had been discredited he starts introducing 
new things which were not presented to yourself or to this 
commission.  Am I required to respond to or I will respond 
happily but it was an affidavit sent to the commission but it 
was not presented. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well to the extent that – to the extent that 
10 
you are made to understand that it might be inconsistent 
with your evidence you should feel free to deal with it 
obviously if you need more time then you make an affidavit 
it can be done in due course. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And sorry Chair in addition to that Mr 
Wakeford you did reply to this.  It was – this I am reading 
from the answering affidavit of Mr Agrizzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  In the application to cross-examine you 
and he filed a replying affidavit.  So he did deal with it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Respond to it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR WAKEFORD:    Ja so Chair this was never presented in 
the public domain but other than for me to say that I stand 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 175 of 318 
 
by what I have just said and I stand by what I said in my 
affidavit in response to it.  And I really have nothing further 
to add.  I think it is innocuous quite frankly and – and really 
does not bear any relevance to – to the allegations. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Look – look… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well is the not – is not one of the points 
about it is that you – to the extent that we can – if we were 
to accept that it came from you that email and it was 
addressed to Angelo Agrizze to the extent – if we accept 
that that is correct then isn’t it that it reflects that you also 
10 
used this term of confectionary in your conversation with 
him and he provided an explanation for what it was used to 
mean 
in 
paragraph, 
I 
think, 
4.9 
of 
his 
affidavit 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that Mr Notshe read earlier on.  So on 
the face of it, it would seem to me that if it is indeed the 
email that came from you and went to Mr Agrizzi, it reflects 
that you also used this term that he talked about in his 
affidavit.  He gave a certain meaning in his affidavit as to 
20 
what it meant and that may be important against what you 
said 
earlier, 
namely 
you 
doubt 
that 
the 
emails 
are 
authentic. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I said in my responding affidavit 
that I doubted whether the email was authentic but save to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 176 of 318 
 
say that the term confectionary could mean a whole lot of 
things.  I do no remember the specific email in the first 
instance.  In the second instance, he alleges that I 
required money to pay Mike Tshishonga. 
 
Now quite frankly, Mike Tshishonga was not an 
intermediary and was not a person I needed to interact 
with 
Nosiviwe 
Noluthando 
Mapisa-Nqakula 
being 
the 
Minister of Corrections at the time and I was not a 
consultant to Correction either.  That is another statement 
he made that I was a consultant to Correction which I was 
10 
not ever.  I was approached and I never took it up because 
I had other activities at the time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe in fairness to Mr Wakeford 
but also to get the whole picture.  Mr Notshe, you should 
take us to his response ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in his affidavit ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is on page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...response to Mr Agrizzi in connection 
with this. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is on page 318, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   318? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am there.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Paragraph 56. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 177 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you found it, Mr Wakeford? 
MR WAKEFORD:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, in paragraph 56.3 where he says 
– you say: 
“I 
never 
called 
or 
referred 
to 
Mr 
Mike 
Tshishonga as Smarties and I deny I ever refer 
to money as confectionary. 
These are fabrications of Agrizzi...” 
 
That is your answer.  And today you are giving a 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, read the next one for the sake of 
completeness ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  And then 5 point ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...point four ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...56.4, he says: 
“I further deny that I ever paid Mr Michael 
Tshishonga money to interact with the Minister, 
Mapisa-Nqakula nor is this acquisition assisted 
with Agrizzi’s own affidavit...” 
20 
 
In paragraph 4.9 in this affidavit, Agrizzi says 
that: 
“The money was provided to Tshishonga for 
the benefit of interacting on behalf of BOSASA 
with the minister....” 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 178 of 318 
 
 
However, in paragraph 4.7, Agrizzi says: 
“Valence 
Watson 
and 
myself 
were 
communicating with the minister directly over 
the same period...” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, one.  Mr Wakeford, you do 
say you dispute the authenticity of the emails.  Would that 
still be the position?  I think earlier on you did not put as 
strongly as that, namely that you disputing it.  My 
recollection 
is 
that 
you 
said 
you 
would 
doubt 
its 
authenticity, because there is a distinction between the 
10 
two.  Are you going as far as saying you are dispute it or 
are you saying you doubt its authenticity? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, when I first saw it, I dispute its 
authenticity, number one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Number two.  The terms confectionary 
was never used for money and we have heard what terms 
they used for money.  Thirdly, I did dispute because Mike 
Tshishonga has always been called Mike by me, not 
Smarties.  And thirdly, I would – you know to pay Mike 
20 
Tshishonga to meet the minister after I had spent two years 
on the project prior to that at Home Affairs, reporting to the 
minister.  I just cannot understand why I would ever need 
to pay Mike Tshishonga for something like that, and in fact, 
I never paid Mike Tshishonga anything because I did not 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 179 of 318 
 
need to.  And I never paid a public official anything 
because I never needed to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the you talked about – you said they 
never used on their evidence the word confectionary for 
money.  Did you ever use the word confectionary in your 
interactions with Mr Agrizzi? 
MR WAKEFORD:   If I used the word confectionary, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Mr Chair, it would not have referred to 
money. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   It would have referred to exactly what it 
is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, normal meaning. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And...hmm  In – then when he deposed 
to the replying affidavit, why did you not explain that you 
think this referred to the cake that they would normally 
serve the guests as you are now explaining?  Why did you 
20 
not then in your replying affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just repeat your question. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   In your replying affidavit, why did you 
not 
give 
the 
explanation 
you 
are 
giving 
today 
that 
confectionary probably referred to the ...[intervenes]  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 180 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   I probably did(?), Chair.  I probably did 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   I do not want to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  You are responding 
differently ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, Chair.  Maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Finish the question.  Let him finish. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The question is.  In the affidavit on 
page 318:  Why did you not give the explanation you are 
10 
giving today?  Today he says confectionary probably meant 
the 
cakes 
that 
Agrizzi 
would 
serve 
people 
but 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he says.  One, he – if he used the 
word confectionary in his interactions with Mr Agrizzi, he 
would have used it in its normal meaning. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he is not necessarily saying he did 
use it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  In the affidavit – in his affidavit he 
said he disputes the authenticity of the email and then he 
said what he said. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The question is exactly that that 
...[intervenes]  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 181 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...why did he not give the explanation 
he gives today to say that if I used confectionary I would 
have been referring to cakes and other nice things that 
Mr Agrizzi would serve the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, I do not know because it is – 
Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit puts a certain case, you know.  I 
asked him the question:  Did you ever use it?  And he says 
if ever he used it he seemed to be saying he did not use it 
or he did not remember ever using it but if he used it he 
10 
would not have used it in any way other than in its normal 
meaning.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am just not sure whether he would 
have needed to go as far as you are suggesting he should 
have but if you see something in Mr Agrizzi’s paragraph 4.9 
that suggests that he should have gone beyond or – then 
you can ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, Chair that is the high-level I could 
take it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now lastly, Mr Wakeford.  The 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe you are – maybe you are 
too quick to concede.  I see in 4.9 Mr Agrizzi says: 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 182 of 318 
 
“We used the word confectionary which meant 
money and Smarties was the nickname we 
gave to... 
 
What is he saying about the word confectionary?  
Smarties was the nickname that he says was given to 
Mr Tshishonga but confectionary there – or earlier on he 
says confectionary ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He was referring to money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was referring to money. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Confectionary is money.  When 
10 
he says confectionary was money and Smarties was the 
name given to mister... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is the we that he refers to  because 
if that we refers to Mr Wakeford as well then the point you 
are making maybe one – may be a legitimate one.  Who – 
do you know who he is referring to when he says we in 
paragraph 4.9? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Wakeford – Mr Agrizzi refers to we 
and if you look at the emails we saw, those emails are from 
you.  Does not mean that he – you and him, is the 
20 
understanding we have about confectionary and Smarties. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, Chair.  No, Chair.  I have already 
said that the terms Smarties is a nickname.  I have never 
used that as a nickname for Mike Tshishonga, number one.  
And number two, the terms confectionary.  The only 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 183 of 318 
 
operational 
word 
for 
confectionary, 
particularly 
when 
looking at all the former evidence given in reference to the 
so-called piles of money that were apparently transported 
or whatever to others, they referred to that as loaves of 
bread both Van Tonder and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I must tell you that my recollection 
that they used different words not one word to refer to 
money ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in terms of Mr Agrizzi’s evidence but 
10 
loaves of bread would have been one of the terms.  Ja, ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, for me confectionary means one 
thing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   It is confectionary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And Smarties between adults.  I mean, 
you and Agrizzi are talking about Smarties.  Especially if 
you look at 224, paragraph – page 224.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What paragraph? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The email on 224, page 224. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the one we are looking at or 
another one? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, the one we are looking – the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 184 of 318 
 
second email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there a reference to Smarties there? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Page 224.  KW-026.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   We see there ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...it is an email ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Smarties confirmed. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  I am sure Mr Tshishonga 
agreeing with me.  This must be a code.  I mean, the two of 
10 
you are adults.  You are talking about Smarties as we know 
them.  It must be a code of some kind.  Am I right? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, my contact with Agrizzi was 
limited.  He did not particularly liked me and I think I have 
proven that beyond a reasonable doubt.  I do not think we 
would have any codes between us.  We did not have a 
proper relationship in any event. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And therefore, Chair, please accept that 
which my responses remain my response. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You see, if the emails are 
authentic, then one would look at the context to say.  In the 
email at page 223, what is that you would have been 
talking about when you said to Mr Agrizzi:   
“I 
will 
be 
checking 
out 
the 
confectionary 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 185 of 318 
 
tomorrow morning...”   
 
And then you say:   
“Would 
you 
like 
to 
check 
out 
the 
allegations(?)?...”   
 
And then in the next page, if that email is also 
authentic, you write to Mr Agrizzi and say:   
“Smarties confirmed.  Thanks.”   
 
So one would need to say.  Could you be talking 
about Smarties in the ordinary sense?  And in terms of 
confectionary, could you be talking about confectionary in 
10 
the normal sense or could this be as Mr Agrizzi suggests, a 
code for something else?  But that is if the emails are 
authentic.  So there would need to be work done in regard 
to establish authenticity.  Okay alright.  You do not have 
anything to add to what I have said? 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, Chair.  I do not see any logic or 
motivation for this.  I, honestly, do not see what the value 
is here and what he is actually – he is alleging that I gave 
Mike Tshishonga money.  That is basically what he is 
alleging. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   I am just trying to understand, why 
would I need to do that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, what he is saying, as I 
understand his affidavit, he is saying there was some 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 186 of 318 
 
improper business going on here and in order to hide what 
we were talking about in the emails, we did not want to use 
words like money.  We had to come up with some codes.  
We talk about Smarties, we talked about confectionary and 
in effect, we all knew what we were talking about.  When 
somebody confectionary or Smarties, we all knew.   
 
But somebody who comes across the email who 
does not – who is not within our circles, will not know what 
we are talking about.  So he is taking out of these emails 
to say:  You see, even Mr Wakeford sent me emails where 
10 
he used these codes because he knew what we were 
talking about.  So that is what, as I understand.  That is 
what – that is the effect of it.   
 
So where you say:  I was not involved in 
anything that was improper and therefore had no reason to 
use codes to refer to money.  If we talked about money I 
would have used the word money because there was 
nothing improper.  That, of course, would be your version.   
 
But if the emails were to be found authentic, 
then the question would really arise to say:  Well, why did 
20 
you used these words?  Because if one gives them their 
normal meaning, they would not, for example maybe, apply.  
So that is as I see it.  Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Notshe. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 187 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And Mr Wakeford, in addition to that, 
the emails that follow, we will take you to them, shows 
there are a number of interactions.  You asked – you tried 
to get a job for some young lady from him.  You did interact 
with him on a number of occasions.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Oh, yes.  You know, unfortunately, he 
was running the ship.  And when you are running the ship 
you have got to communicate with the captain.  So, yes, 
that was a professional – I saw it as a professional 
relationship, certainly not as a friendship or a close 
10 
relationship. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You are not running a – what – you are 
not running an employment agency of looking for jobs for 
people, were you? 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, I was not. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But you were looking for a job for 
someone? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...says is a professional. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja, particularly if there are people who 
20 
are talented.  Just as I identified a number of business 
opportunities as well. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   H’m. 
MR WAKEFORD:   You know, if people are talented then 
you would like to bring them into the organisation if there 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 188 of 318 
 
is space and at that time or in that point in time, if I am not 
mistaken, it was a growing organisation that was labour 
absorptive rather than professional(?).  So, yes Chair there 
would have been several occasions where I recommended 
people.   
 
I remember some specifically.  I remember 
recommending a gentleman by the name of Guy Ridge(?) 
who was a PA in the Office of the Premier in the Eastern 
Cape, a very competent gentleman.  And you will find to all 
of those there was no response, number one and number 
10 
two, no employment opportunities were created for anyone 
who was part of my network clearly because there was a 
long list of people, I think, including family members or 
indirect family members that were recruited in the Agrizzi 
clang. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And just to refer to this which you do 
not dispute.  On pages 227 and 228 and 299, 230.  I am 
just referring this ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just before you do that 
Mr Notshe.  It may be necessary to look at these emails 
20 
and the use of these terms and see whether their ordinary 
meaning could fit in within the context or whether it would 
not fit in.  Of course, it may be that Mr Wakeford cannot – 
his affidavit maybe does not assist in that regard because 
in his affidavit he disputed the authenticity.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 189 of 318 
 
 
And if they are not proved to be authentic that 
would then support him but if they are proved to be 
authentic there might be nothing he puts up to say:  Well, I 
used them to mean this and that and that.  Because I think 
that 
he 
was 
saying 
if 
he 
used 
those 
terms 
about 
confectionary in particular.  It would have – he would have 
used in the ordinary meaning. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it may be that the exercise cannot be 
done because his position is:  I dispute the authenticity of 
10 
the emails.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I take it – we can follow it up on 
– I can get the investigators to follow this issue up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And to check on the authenticity of 
these emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Unfortunately and – well, I am not 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Maybe let us 
20 
proceed but I see that we are half-past four.  We should 
take a ten minutes adjournment.  Let us have a ten minutes 
adjournment.  We normally take a ten minutes adjournment 
every two hours.  And then we can continue after that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 190 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do have an evening session but I think 
we continue and stop at a certain time. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Chair, I am almost done.  This is 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   When we come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I do not think I will be more than 30-
minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine.  But that – 
10 
would that cover what you regarded as important? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, I think so.  I think it will cover.  
But 
it 
might 
– 
my 
estimation 
is 
30-minutes 
but 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, no. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...it might be a difficult part of 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...questioning ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sometimes the Chairperson is also 
20 
asking questions.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, but also ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And that takes time as well.  [laughs]   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I must also limit my jokes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us take a ten minutes break.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 191 of 318 
 
But let me mention this part, that if – when we adjourn 
there is any feeling on anybody’s side that are important 
issues that have not been dealt with, I might have to see 
where we can squeeze time to take care of that.  I see that 
tomorrow is not meant for any hearing.  It is meant for 
other matters that need to be dealt with.   
 
It may well be that if we need an hour tomorrow 
or some limited time to finish and if everybody concern is 
available we can look at that.  But if we cannot do it 
tomorrow and there is a need for an hour or something like 
10 
that, we can – I can have a look at the time, at the days 
next week and then we fit in just an hour or so to make 
sure that we do not stop in circumstances where there is 
somebody who still feels there were important issues that 
were not dealt with. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay 
alright. 
 
Let 
us 
take 
an 
adjournment and we will resume at quarter to five. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think we should continue until 
half past five and then if by that time – well, if you finish 
earlier then we will talk and see whether counsel for Mr 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 192 of 318 
 
Wakeford wishes to examine or failing which, we will have 
to make time if he wishes to re-examine in due course for 
him to do so.  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr Wakeford, I am not going to – I do 
not want us to waste time.  You do confirm that you sent 
emails trying to get employment for one Patricia Godfrey 
and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what was the answer? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He says yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I said yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, what was the …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, just for the record… 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page are you on? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Just for the record it is on page 227 
and then 228. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And 229 and then 230.  One of the 
reasons, Mr Wakeford, I am referring you to this, it is just 
merely demonstrate that you were talking to Mr Agrizzi. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I was – yes, Chair, I was emailing him 
20 
whenever 
I 
needed 
to 
reach 
the 
pinnacle 
of 
the 
organisation. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, can you just explain this, an 
email I could not understand, on page 257. 
MR WAKEFORD:   257? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 193 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   257.  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And email from you to Mr Agrizzi and 
you say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just indicate the date and the subject 
before going on. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh, the date is the 7 March 2011 and 
at 11.01, it is from you, Mr Wakeford, to Mr Agrizzi and the 
late Mr Gavin Watson.  You say: 
“Gents..” 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The subject is? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Committee Secretary Contact Details. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The he says: 
“Gents, [indistinct] at this week we need to make a 
judgment call on this matter urgently.  And if you 
look down …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says: 
“See below, emails and then says …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
20 
“See below emails.” 
And then if you go down, the first email there is an email 
from one Belinda Trout, this seems to be the house 
secretary of the House Chairperson Committee’s Oversight, 
ICT National Assembly and it is to you and he says: 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 194 of 318 
 
“Mr 
Wakeford, 
herewith 
details 
of 
PC 
on 
Correctional Services.” 
And then the email after that is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Notshe, I think you must 
just read everything. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Read the content: 
“Committee secretary is there for unit manager…” 
I guess that is – those are people that he is referring to.  
So the email to you, Mr Wakeford, from Ms Belinda Trout, 
10 
executive 
secretary 
House 
Chairperson 
Committee’s 
oversight and ICT National Assembly, it is on 7 March 2011 
at 11.49, the subject is Committee Secretary Contact 
Details.  It says: 
“Dear Mr Wakeford, herewith details of PC on 
Correctional Services.” 
I take PC to be portfolio committee.  It then says: 
“Committee Secretary, Ms Singi Bali(?).” 
And then gives the telephone details. 
“Unit manager Keith Williams” 
20 
Gives contact details. 
“Many thanks, Belinda.” 
Ms Belinda Trout.  That email addressed to you seems to 
have been sent at 11.49 on the 7 March 2011 and it would 
appear in the email that is in the middle of the page that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 195 of 318 
 
you then sent an email to Ms Belinda Trout on the same 
date at 10.54 and the subject is Committee Secretary 
Contact Details, so the same subject.  You say: 
“Hi Belinda, thank you.  Could you send me email 
addresses as well?  Regards, Kevin.” 
Yes, you can take it from there, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then this email – and you then 
send this email from Ms Trout to Mr Agrizzi and Mr Kevin 
Watson. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Say: 
“The hearings are this week.” 
Were these portfolio committee hearings? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I do not recall to be frank with 
you but if it says PC, that is portfolio committee. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   That is how I would see it and, you 
know, from time to time, because I was a trouble shooter, I 
would alert them to what is taking place both in the 
parliamentary sphere and elsewhere.  But there were 
20 
hearings, the context of those hearings I would not know. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you say: 
“We need to make a judgment call on this matter 
urgently.” 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, I see that, Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 196 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You see that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I see that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now if we go back. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   If you go back to the email from Ms 
Trout, she sends you the emails the Provincial – the 
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you know that BOSASA had a 
contract with Correctional Services. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So this is a portfolio committee 
regarding the department wherein BOSASA had a contract. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, I am just trying to understand 
relevance, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The relevance is this, we see you 
saying at the top: 
“We must make a judgment call” 
About this Portfolio Committee on the department wherein 
we have a contract.  And what was that? 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I am not sure exactly what the 
judgment call would refer but I presume because the 
hearings were that particular week, I think the judgment 
call would be does one attend or does one not attend?  
And it could have been – if I am not mistaken, there were 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 197 of 318 
 
already some utterances in the public domain and within 
the Portfolio Committee if I am not mistaken at that point in 
time about BOSASA but I do not have that immediate 
recollection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I can tell you this and this might 
assist you in terms of your memory because I have heard 
evidence relating to portfolio committees in particular  the 
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services.  
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And BOSASA.  You will recall that in 
10 
2009 there was a general election in the country so there 
would have been then a new parliament after elections and 
the new Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services.  As 
I recall, either before the end of 2009 or at the latest 
towards the end of 2010, according to the evidence of Mr 
Vincent Smith, if I recall correctly, but also evidence of 
one or other MPs who gave evidence here, the SIU report 
into investigations at BOSASA and Correctional Services 
was 
presented 
to 
the 
Correctional 
Services 
Portfolio 
Committee and the majority if not all the members were 
20 
shocked by the irregularities that were dealt with in that 
report.   
 
So the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services 
was aware of that report either from towards the end of 
2009 or some stage in 2010.  So it may or may not be that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 198 of 318 
 
this may have been in connection with that. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, I am not – Chair, I can say with 
absolute honesty that the judgment call to my mind of 
thinking would be does one attend it, if it is an opening 
hearing, or does one not attend it?  And I would have 
encouraged 
engagement 
and 
attendance 
rather 
than 
avoiding those. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No matter how hard it may be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Notshe? 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now – and but you say you cannot 
recall? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja, well this is what, 2011, that is a 
good ten years ago. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now can you turn to page 252? 
MR WAKEFORD:   252? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now let us start at the bottom of that 
page.  There is an email …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Page 252. 
CHAIRPERSON:   252? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   252, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 199 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Look at the bottom of that page, an 
email from Gavin Bradshaw. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And to you and he says: 
“Dear 
Prof 
Wakeford, 
herewith 
please 
find 
as 
attachment the position paper as requested.  Please 
feel free to make critical comment.  I will be happy 
to make any adjustments that time will allow.  Kind 
regards, Dr Gavin Bradshaw.” 
Who is this? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Dr Gavin Bradshaw at that time worked 
for the Institute for Conflict Resolution at the University of 
Port Elizabeth, today known as Nelson Mandela University. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   What was he talking about? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   What was he talking about in this? 
MR WAKEFORD:   This was a position paper on public 
private sector partnerships. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then I see that at the top of that 
page on 252.  You sent the paper to Mr Agrizzi, back to Mr 
20 
Bradshaw, Gavin Watson.  Do you see that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Say: 
“Dear Angelo, please check the attached position 
paper for the bid process and comment accordingly.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 200 of 318 
 
I am satisfied with the general approach and we 
want to emphasise - you want more emphasis in 
certain areas.  Kind regards, Kevin Wakeford.” 
You wanted Agrizzi to comment on this. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I wanted everyone to comment that I 
sent it to, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   For what purpose? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Well, at the end of the day, when you  - 
you know, that was prior to submitting one’s bids for a 
private prison, which never happened, of course.  And one 
10 
of the key treasury instruments that are used are public 
private sector partnerships.  So that was the approach that 
the team needed to understand, that if you are going to 
insert that in your bid, you need to understand you need a 
basic – you need a common point of departure. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So this was for – so that you 
understand how the bidding was going to be?  This was 
going to regulate, the BBBEE. 
MR WAKEFORD:   This is to understand what the team 
needs to do to have a competent and efficient bid in terms 
20 
of BBBEE and the approach to BBBEE. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see. 
MR WAKEFORD:   This – there are different views within 
the state on what one should use.  Some would advocate 
and absolute private entity, others would advocate a public 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 201 of 318 
 
private sector partnership. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see.  Now let us move off topic and 
start – and go to page 231. 
MR WAKEFORD:   231? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Are you there? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This is an email from you – okay, if 
you start at the bottom.  You know, I always struggle with 
these emails, I want to read at the top whereas they start 
at the bottom. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the email on the 8 October 2009 
from Agrizzi to you. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It says: 
“Very confidential, please do not discuss.” 
And then the following day on the 9 October 2009 you then 
say: 
“Dear Angelo, why is this confidential?  This is a 
genuine transparent business proposal.  Rather 
20 
discuss your response verbally, I hate emails.  May 
I suggest that the costings are rather high, I will go 
for 
a 
fixed 
retainer 
inclusive 
of 
all 
costs 
at 
R100 000 per month, renewable on a six monthly 
basis.  Regards.” 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 202 of 318 
 
You.  You remember this email? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I remember it.  I commented on it in my 
– I think my second affidavit with annexures. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And this email, does it not confirm 
Agrizzi’s evidence that you were paid a retainer of 
100 000? 
MR WAKEFORD:   That I was repaid? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You were paid. 
MR WAKEFORD:   No.  No, this has got nothing to do with 
me. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   What has it got to with? 
MR WAKEFORD:   This email is – what you do not see and 
what he failed to attach, Chair, is an attachment on the 
fleet management contract and he did not want me to 
speak to Aneel about it.  So what he did was he sent it to 
me.  Aneel had sent it to him directly.  I had no knowledge 
of it but it is all in my – I think it is my second affidavit and 
I actually went as far, Chair, as to get the actual proposal 
which he failed to send and I attached.  So Aneel had – 
Aneel Radhakrishna had emailed him.  He then emailed me 
20 
to say: 
“Very confidential, please do not discuss.” 
And then I responded: 
“Why is this very confidential?” 
And 
I 
had 
suggested 
because 
Aneel 
Radhakrishna 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 203 of 318 
 
proposal, if I remember correctly, was R18 000 a day. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yoh! 
MR WAKEFORD:   And I had said I could not support that, 
if you want my input I would for that particular project for 
its duration, I would offer the company R100 000 a month.  
And that is the sum total of that, Chair, and I am quite 
happy to guide you to the actual document in one of my 
former affidavits. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Where would we find that because I 
looked in your affidavit, whose affidavit …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, his counsel might be able to 
assist. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So if I could just ask my team if they 
could assist with that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   313. 
MR WAKEFORD:   In this big pack.  In my annexures? 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes, that is in the annexures that are 
before the Commission, placed before the Commission 
today, Mr Wakeford.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I am sorry, I missed that, what is 
20 
the…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   313. 
ADV WILLIS:   313 of the EA, evidence affidavit, 313.  I do 
not know what the 04 numbers are, sorry. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   313. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 204 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair, if you go to my pack. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   It is 1254. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Ja.  Sorry, 154? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:    1254. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, I am sorry.  Okay.  This is 
BOSASA bundle 4(a). 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, this is the bundle with the 
affidavits – I am sorry, with the annexures, these are the 
annexures to Mr Wakeford’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is the other file that he talked 
10 
about. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, it is the final annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on, Mr Wakeford, 
otherwise we will not …[intervenes] 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …one another.  Yes. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so Mr Notshe, so this is the other 
file. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The other file, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That has got the …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Annexures to Mr Wakeford’s affidavit.  
That they have been using today. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 205 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And what we were looking 
for was Mr – what Mr Wakeford was looking for was his 
affidavit but in his affidavit he was going to get the 
proposal, is that right?  You were looking for the proposal. 
MR WAKEFORD:   So, Chair, this is the proposal that was 
attached to this email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So at page 1253 of BOSASA bundle 4 we 
find a document that is written draft proposal sent from 
10 
Akhile to Agrizzi and it is written Akhile, it is dated 8 
October 2009, it is in the form of a letter, is that what you 
are talking about, Mr Wakeford? 
MR WAKEFORD:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is the proposal, draft proposal. 
MR WAKEFORD:   This is the proposal, Akhile, 8 October 
2009. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And this is the email sent to me the 
following day with that attached on the 9 October 2009. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja.  I see it says: 
“Proposal for advisory services Fleet Management 
Solutions.” 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct, that is it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Notshe? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 206 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And actually in the email of the 8 
October, the one sent to you by Mr Agrizzi, the topic is 
draft proposal. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The heading is draft proposal, so it 
links with …[intervenes] 
MR WAKEFORD:   With this. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   With this which is a draft proposal. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Hundred percent. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just for the sake of completeness, that 
draft proposal appearing at page 1253 of BOSASA bundle 
or was addressed to the Chief Operations Officer for 
[indistinct] fleet management services, for the attention Mr 
Angelo Agrizzi and it came from Aneel Radhakrishna, Chief 
Executive Officer, I think of Akhile.  Yes.  Okay, continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now where I was, I was starting in a 
discussion – the reason I referred you to, was starting a 
discussion about the retainer.  He is saying the retainer – 
your evidence is that the retainer was not 100 000, it was 
20 
50 000. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then on page 11, 1159. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of which bundle now?  The one that has 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 207 of 318 
 
got annexures? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The bundle – the additional bundle, 
the affidavit, herewith annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is bundle 4(a). 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   4(a) yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Right, what page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   1159, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, mine will not have – oh no, 11, not 
12, 1159. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair, I have got it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And there you will show a schedule of 
invoices and payments received from BOSASA, received by 
you, am I right? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And I have noticed – and please help 
me, I have noticed that there are number of payments that 
are for R114 000. 
MR WAKEFORD:   That is correct, Chair, but if you go and 
20 
have a closer look at the schedule you will notice that 
there are certain months that are not paid.  Let me give 
you an example.  The 25 February 2010 you will see a line 
there, new payment …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry, Mr Wakeford.  Mr 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 208 of 318 
 
Notshe, you said 1159? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   1159, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not have a table there, I have got 
Mr Venter ’s affidavit. 
ADV WILLIS:   Chairman, I also do not have that 1159. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, no, I am sorry, I am 1059 instead of 
1159. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I have got it, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, now I have got it. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Mr Chair, you will see this is a schedule 
which goes over to 1160 and to 1161 and 1162. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But Mr Wakeford is explaining. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, the way it has been constructed 
by my forensic accountant …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what do you want him to explain? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I am wanting to explain why there were 
certain payments for 114 000, that is a 100 000 plus VAT. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you did that in the morning, did 
you not? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I did explain it comprehensively, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, he explained that in the 
morning. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 209 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And in total… 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   In total how much were you paid by 
BOSASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In total over what period? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I gave an explanation this morning. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   March 2009 to …[intervenes] 
MR WAKEFORD:   No, it was actually June 2006, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but, Mr Notshe, is there an issue 
about the total over a certain period?  Was the issue not 
10 
only about what he was paid per month? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I just want to check how much the total 
amount that BOSASA expended on him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but what are we going to do with 
that, if it is not an issue? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Well, it is not in dispute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But the issue – the only issue I would 
20 
argue at the end that in the retainer he got x amount and 
then you link it with working with the department and – my 
argument in the end …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that can be added up in the table is 
it not? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 210 of 318 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   That is all I have for the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is all the questions you have for 
him?   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you.  What is your 
position on whether you want to re-examine? 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Chairman, there are a couple of things 
that I think I would be remiss in my duty if I did not attend 
10 
to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   I would like to – I am satisfied with the 
evidence that Mr Wakeford has given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:   But you would have noticed that the 
evidence did not – it was not examined in much relation to 
anything he testified about this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   But in relation to matters that we would say 
20 
fall outside the scope of the allegations made against him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:   In those circumstances, I am of the view 
that I need to be re-examine.  I expect to be off now, I will 
not be asking questions of Mr Agrizzi – sorry, Mr Wakeford. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 211 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   Which would require long answers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   But I have a number of points I need to 
pitch on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you will recall that in terms of the 
regulations 
the 
re-examination 
is 
for 
clarification, 
of 
course. 
ADV WILLIS:   Indeed, so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just clarification, ja. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   That is all it is, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we are at quarter past now.  That will 
not give you thirty minutes to half past. 
ADV WILLIS:   I can attempt it and I think we should and in 
the interests of the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, of course, I am not saying that to 
say I will not give you the chance to, all I am looking at is 
whether it should be now or at another time. 
ADV WILLIS:   I would like to attempt to do it now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Within 15 minutes. 
20 
ADV WILLIS:   In 15 minutes, Mr… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV WILLIS:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you.  Then just 
sanitise the podium and then you can go there. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 212 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, if I may indulge you and request 
some humble citizen to give me some water please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please, is there some water?  
Please give him some water.  Well, Mr Wakeford, Mr 
Notshe cannot say that you did not make him drink water 
with your answers. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Exactly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I saw him drinking water as well. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair, in Xhosa we say galela amanzi, 
galela. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Counsel for Mr Wakeford, you can go to 
the podium. 
ADV WILLIS:   Sorry, Mr Chair, I have just lost my mask in 
and amongst ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It must have fallen onto the floor, unless 
it is underneath some ...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:   I think that is what happened yes, but the 
...[indistinct – speaking away from mic] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If somebody is able to switch off his mic 
please do so.  Yes.   
20 
ADV WILLIS:   Thank you Mr Chair ... and to try and work 
in reverse I will talk a little bit quicker than has been the 
practice until now, I will speed it up, if you go to BOSASA 
04767 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we going to be at Bundle 4? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 213 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes that is Bundle 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay and the rate is? 
ADV WILLIS:   767.  While you are looking for it this 
relates to the last, the penultimate question or debate 
amongst yourself and Mr Notshe and the Chairman relating 
to Aneel Radhakrishna and Phakisa and the one so the 
pages that you ended up at were 1253 and 1254 in the 
proposal, do you recall that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   And that spoke to – part of that issue spoke 
10 
the relationship between Mr Aneel Radhakrishna and 
Sagren Naidoo is that correct? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct. 
ADV WILLIS:   And if you look at paragraph 21.11, first let 
me tell you what this affidavit is, this is the response by Mr 
Agrizzi to Mr Aneel Radhakrishna which was furnished to 
Mr Notshe I think yesterday or the night before yesterday 
and we received that yesterday morning, but the latest 
affidavit by Mr Agrizzi, and you can just read that into the 
record, paragraph 21.2 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   
“I deny these allegations and wish to point out that 
Aneel 
Radhakrishna 
appointed 
the 
then 
Chief 
Financial Officer, Sagren Naidoo of Home Affairs 
into Achille as a consultant and he was later co-
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 214 of 318 
 
opted into the Eastern Cape Fleet Management 
tender by both the Late Gavin Watson ably assisted 
by Kevin Wakeford but this contract did not come 
into place as Corana Phakisa did not perform or 
obtain financing to execute the contract.” 
ADV WILLIS:   Very quickly that confirms the relationship 
between Aneel Radhakrishna and Sagren Naidoo, any 
further comments? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair just to point out that Sagren 
Naidoo was an acting Chief Financial Officer, he was on a 
10 
short-term contract at Home Affairs as I understand it, he 
was male and not female, because I do know in previous 
affidavits Mr Agrizzi referred to him as a female, and that I 
do remember seeing Sagren operating with Aneel from time 
to time post and long after the Home Affairs contract that I 
really don’t have much more, but this just confirms that 
Agrizzi requested Aneel Radhakrishna to participate in a 
fleet management contract and not ...[indistinct – dropping 
voice].   I think what Agrizzi was alluding to or in fact 
saying emphatically that Aneel Radhakrishna was getting 
20 
compensation for having an extension of a Home Affairs 
contract, which is absolute rubbish Chair.  
ADV WILLIS:   I noted that the date of that proposal and 
the Chairman specifically read into the record I think it was 
addressed the Chief Operating Officer which was Mr 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 215 of 318 
 
Agrizzi, was dated the 8 t h of October 2009. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Correct. 
ADV WILLIS:   I would like you to comment on that in 
relation to the payments to Distinctive One Choice.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Distinctive One Choice as I remember 
was 2012 according to Aneel Radhakrishna’s affidavit. 
ADV WILLIS:   Long time thereafter. 
MR WAKEFORD:   And I think the prelim report refers to 
that as well. 
ADV WILLIS:  You were at a point not too – it wasn’t too 
10 
long before this debate, Mr Notshe said to you following on 
some other discussion and he – I don’t recall if he said I 
put it to you but he was pursuing a point, he said you were 
talking to Mr Agrizzi.   You then said, you then spoke to the 
issue at hand, yes when reaching out to the pinnacle 
reaching up to the pinnacle, you described it as the captain 
previously too, have you ever denied that there are lots of 
emails between you and Mr Agrizzi?  
MR WAKEFORD:   No I have not, I think for that period of 
time there isn’t a huge volume but as it spans a period 
20 
Chair of 2006 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Come closer to the mic. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry it spans a long period of time, it is 
nine years and yes of course, when you are in business 
and 
you 
are 
a 
professional 
you 
don’t 
take 
things 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 216 of 318 
 
personally, you deal with the man in charge, and that was 
Agrizzi, and I had to deal with him and in fact Gavin 
Watson 
was 
enamoured 
with 
Agrizzi, 
Agrizzi 
had 
ingratiated himself to such an extent that Gavin was a 
ceremonial CEO, at most, he certainly wasn’t the man 
making the key decisions in the organisation, but I think I 
said that this morning Chair. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Wakeford you will recall the discussion 
around, and it took some time, it traversed a number of 
different aspects of the evidence relating to Mr Papadakis 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I think I must just mention 
this in response to – in relation to what you say, that is not 
the impression I got of Mr Gavin Watson from Mr Agrizzi’s 
evidence, I got the impression that Mr Gavin Watson was 
quite actively involved in directing the business, but left 
issues of paperwork and other things to Mr Agrizzi and 
other people, but I got the impression that he had a strong 
personality and that he was in charge of BOSASA but in 
terms of operations may have left a lot of that to other 
20 
people.   I didn’t get the impression that his position was 
just ceremonial.   I think I must just mention that 
...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:  Chair I take that, I accept what you are 
saying, Gavin was an inspirational leader, he had a great 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 217 of 318 
 
vision, but I suppose if one had to compare when President 
Mandela was running the country, his deputy was Deputy 
President Thabo Mbeki at the time, and we all know, any 
student of politics would tell you that Madiba was a 
charismatic, 
inspirational 
leader 
who 
promoted 
reconciliation, who inspired people, but the man running 
the show at the time was Deputy President Thabo Mbeki.  
He was making sure that the wheels of government were 
well oiled and were – government was moving fairly 
quickly, 
whereas 
Madiba 
would 
appear 
at 
different 
10 
functions, he would give inspirational speeches but the 
real heart or management of the State was Deputy 
President Mbeki at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  
MR WAKEFORD:   Just using that as a metaphor Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Chairman I am using the bundle which 
was given to us [audio distorted].  Mr Wakeford I was just 
asking in relation to the discussions around Mr Papadakis, 
there was a discussion about supplies, there was a 
20 
discussion about the contractor ...[indistinct] just to remind 
but you said on more than one occasion, you spoke about 
what you were told or what you knew or what you learnt 
words to that effect, where did you learn that from? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I that from, if I am – Chair I learnt that 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 218 of 318 
 
from Papadakis himself. 
ADV WILLIS:   Okay, and when? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Years ago. 
ADV WILLIS:   So if you go to BOSASA ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   I do remember him contacting me Chair 
and saying I have settled, I have paid this thing, because 
he was worried if I recall that he didn’t want to be fingered 
for being naughty 
ADV WILLIS:   04689 is the affidavit of Mr Papadakis 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry Chair 04? 
ADV WILLIS:   689. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair I have got it. 
ADV WILLIS:   I think we can clear this up, if you read 
from paragraph 4.2 and if you can read a bit faster than 
earlier so that we can ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry from where, from what paragraph? 
ADV WILLIS:   Paragraph 4.2. 
MR WAKEFORD:   4.2? 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes, read the words of Mr Papadakis under 
20 
oath in his affidavit to the Commission, that’s page 609. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Okay, he says: 
“I met Ronnie and Valence Watson around this time.  
According to my recollection I met Gavin Watson in 
late 2014 after I had left the employ of SARS.  I had 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 219 of 318 
 
never met the 4 t h brother.” 
ADV WILLIS:   Could you stop, when are the allegations in 
relation to cement before this Commission? 
MR WAKEFORD:   The allegations relating to cement were 
in late 2008, early 2009.  
ADV WILLIS:   So here he says he only met Watson later, 
right, 4.3? 
MR WAKEFORD:   4.3: 
“At no stage requested ...”...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:    It says I at no stage ...[intervenes]     
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry. 
“I at no stage requested or was offered or received 
any financial inducement or benefit from Wakeford 
or anyone else in relation to BOSASA.  Whilst 
building at Echo State – at Echo State in a 
discussion with Ronnie and Valence they indicated 
that they were engaged with a major cement 
manufacturer at the time, they mentioned that if I 
ever encountered difficulties with cement supply I 
should let me know.   They lived in Port Elizabeth 
20 
and told me to communicate with Wakeford if 
needed.  During the period of construction I was 
fully employed and as such the building activities 
were attended to by my contractors, including the 
ordering of materials.  I cannot recall the quantities 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 220 of 318 
 
of cement ordered, but towards the latter part of 
2009 I was provided with an amount that needed to 
be settled which was settled.” 
ADV WILLIS:   Continue. 
MR WAKEFORD:   4.5: 
“That is why when I was implicated by ...[Indistinct] 
Foster 
who 
testified 
that 
delivery 
notes 
are 
available I immediately requested access to the 
same.  I did so as the quantities and values 
attested were incomprehensible to me.  The records 
10 
subsequently made available to me confirmed the 
fallaciousness 
of 
the 
allegations 
in 
that 
no 
deliveries 
for 
wet 
cement 
were 
made 
by 
...[indistinct] subsequent to the 10 t h of July 2009 
and the RTC records reflect an invoice and delivery 
dated in February 2010 which was credited as 
goods not even being ordered.  Other than this 
there is an invoice which only refers to delivery to 
the general Masdale area.”  
ADV WILLIS:   You paid tribute, I think it was in this regard 
20 
to the investigators of the Commission in regard to 
accessing of the records from RGS I think it is and Wern, 
the suppliers to supply building materials to BOSASA, and 
you credited them accessing that information, we know that 
they accessed the statements by ex-employees etcetera, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 221 of 318 
 
you recall that? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes.  
ADV WILLIS:   You have regard to that evidence haven’t 
you? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry? 
ADV WILLIS:   You have regard to all of that evidence 
haven’t you? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   Does any of it bear out either the numbers 
or the time period in relation to the allegations against you 
10 
and Mr Papadakis? 
MR WAKEFORD:  There is no linkage whatsoever Chair.  
ADV WILLIS:   If you could the turn in this affidavit to page 
702, this is now in relation, I want you to go through 
paragraph 8.1 of page 702, this is in relation to what Mr 
Foster had to say. 
MR WAKEFORD: Yes.   
ADV WILLIS:   8.1 and 8.2 of these – of this page please 
read it into the record as quickly as you can. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Thank you Chair. 
20 
“Foster testified that deliveries of wet and dry 
cement were made during late 2009 to 2010 for 
approximately one year.  These dates are clearly 
inconsistent 
with 
the 
timeframe 
in 
his 
supplementary affidavit, in his zero – sorry 4 t h of 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 222 of 318 
 
April 2019 supplementary affidavit Foster seeks to 
change the periods of the alleged deliveries to 
between 
2009 
and 
2011 
to 
the 
best 
of 
his 
recollection.  The house to which the deliveries 
were allegedly made had been built by late 2009 
which is well before 2011.  This significant deviation 
must be considered against Foster ’s evidence that 
he maintained a book of amounts ordered.  It is 
incomprehensible that having this book available to 
him Foster could testify that the delivery period was 
10 
late 2009  to 2010, and then changed his version to 
2009 and 2011, and that this is to the best of his 
recollection.   His lie becomes apparent from the 
Google Earth image of 27 December 2009 which 
clearly shows that by this date the house already 
had a roof on.   On any construction the allegation 
that wet cement was delivered at least subsequent 
to 27 December 2009 is a pure fabrication.” 
ADV WILLIS:   And you recall that the testimony was that 
in the region of R600 000 worth of cement was supplied to 
20 
Mr Papadakis.   On the records as you recollect what is the 
closest figure that the investigators have been able to find 
there was evidence of? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair I speak under correction but it 
was around R200 000. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 223 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:   You have testified you ...[indistinct] paid for 
it that’s what you understood.   If we – if I could ask you to 
change to page 760.  Thank you Chair, just stay with me, 
this is the affidavit of Mr Agrizzi and there was a short 
discussion, debate between yourself and Mr Notshe around 
the veracity of figures put forward by Mr Agrizzi and if you 
will bear with me to find it.  Now – sorry it was at this 
stage that – and I don’t recall the pages, but my notes just 
indicated that it was here and that Mr Notshe put to you Mr 
Agrizzi’s questioning of profits and the like. 
10 
 
Your – you have dealt with this in fact Mr Notshe 
put it to you in testing, as a method to test your evidence 
...[indistinct] that you had given this morning and if you 
could go there Mr Wakeford you might find it, look at 296, 
paragraph 206 and then we will give everybody the 
reference I think it is page 83 of your affidavit I believe, 
yes ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ...[indistinct] in which bundle it 
is? 
ADV WILLIS:   It is 04, it is ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...[Indistinct]  
MR WILLIS:   This is the affidavit of Mr ...[indistinct] this 
morning 04934. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, and the page? 
MR WILLIS:   That is 934, the paragraph is at 295. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 224 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The paragraph is 295. 
ADV WILLIS:   Can you confirm we go to 295.1 in this 
figure there, you go to 295. [00.20.34] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, I think I don’t think I 
would have paragraph 295, or is that the page number? 
MR WAKEFORD:  Sorry Chair, can I just clarify that.   Is 
this an affidavit drafted by Angelo Agrizzi? 
ADV WILLIS:   This is your affidavit. 
MR WAKEFORD:   My affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one that is under divider 12. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes under 12, your affidavit 936. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And it starts at page 852 of 
Bundle 4. 
ADV WILLIS:   852? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and you said it is paragraph 205, is 
that right? 
ADV WILLIS:   295 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay 295 is at page 23 – page 934, 
paragraph 295 is at page 94 and you are we are using the 
black pagination. 
20 
ADV WILLIS:   934 black pagination numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:   These two calculations in 296.1 and 296.2 
are you able to confirm that those are in fact the 
investigators totals that they write there. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 225 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair sorry, I am still struggling here. 
ADV WILLIS:   No problem. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Where are we on my affidavit? 
ADV WILLIS:   Your affidavit relates to 934 in the bundle. 
MR WAKEFORD:   934? 
ADV WILLIS:   In the bundle yes.   Your paragraph, we are 
now using the bundle Chair for everyone’s convenience, 
924, sorry Chair I know you are tired now. 
MR WAKEFORD:   I am having the slight, the same sort of 
difficulties because we had to this morning switch over to 
10 
...[indistinct] and we had our own yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, fine. 
ADV WILLIS:   Sorry Chair 934 I am on that page, 296, and 
296.1 and 296.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh that is 295, not 296 on mine. 
ADV WILLIS:   Sorry, 295. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, paragraph number. 
ADV WILLIS:   295 and 295.2, do you see those numbers? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes I see them. 
ADV WILLIS:   You testified to those calculations, later on 
20 
Notshe took you to paragraphs in Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit 
which disputed your figures.  These figures here can you 
confirm that these come from the investigators of this 
Commission? 
MR WAKEFORD:   100% Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 226 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:   And you have broken these calculations 
down, back into what they are vis-a-vis numbers of persons 
that ...[indistinct – dropping voice] catered for, gave you 
rates etcetera, is that correct? 
MR WAKEFORD:   100% Chair. 
ADV WILLIS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you have gone beyond 20 
minutes so I should mention that. 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes, then Mr Chairman, at the end, and I 
won’t waste time now, there is a timeline which was left out 
10 
of the bundle, out of our pack of documents, there is a 
timeline.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Wakeford are you aware of this timeline 
that was prepared? 
MR WAKEFORD:   I am aware of the timeline that is 
prepared. 
ADV WILLIS:   Does this timeline speak to what is in your 
affidavit? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sir it even has the necessary references 
20 
throughout. 
ADV WILLIS:   And I will if I could afterwards I will make 
sure you get a copy Mr Chairman and everyone else, I 
won’t delay with that now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine.  And of course also 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 227 of 318 
 
when you put in your written submissions it can make use 
of those references. 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:   Indeed.   Mr Chairman might I just make a 
note, because I had made it in my notes here and I did not 
have the time to do it this morning in his evidence, Mr 
Wakeford moved on pretty fast, and there were some 
paragraphs there that if I had the time I would take him 
back to, I am not going to do that, but I know that you will 
10 
have regard and as you have just said we will set that out 
in our submissions. 
 
I just – you will recall this morning, it was at the 
time that Mr Woods objected to evidence, he spoke of 
amounts of money being removed from the country, there 
was a nine million and something else, R91million I think 
for Mr Agrizzi and others, he even spoke to his wife taking 
out the country, Mr Woods’ objection was to say that well 
that was taken out with Reserve Bank approval.   
 
What is your comment, what is it that you have an 
20 
issue with here? 
MR WAKEFORD:   No Chair it is merely to demonstrate the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Wakeford can I just interrupt you, are 
you interested in how it was taken out the country, do you 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 228 of 318 
 
dispute  how it was ...[intervenes]   
MR WAKEFORD:   No I don’t dispute ...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:   What is it that – what was the point you 
wanted to make? 
MR WAKEFORD:   The point is very simple, there were 
huge volumes of money being taken out of the country, the 
source of which you can be sure was BOSASA. 
ADV WILLIS:   Very briefly, I just want to give you an 
opportunity I want you to keep it very short.  What is your 
complaint in respect of Mr Agrizzi and Lord Hain? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, Chair you ruled in early 2019, in 
particular after there was a social media release with 
everything that was going to be discussed here in January 
2019, and you made an order as a Judge that no one may 
use any of this material in the media prior to it being 
formally presented in the public forum like this.   And I 
have adhered to that without question Chair.   In face I 
have made two complaints to the press on ...[indistinct], I 
have been awarded both in my favour, the Sunday Times 
and an NGO publication called New Frame, but more 
20 
importantly Chair in this case he took an internal document 
which I have formally complained to the Commission about, 
that related to the preliminary report on this matter and it 
was sent to Lord Peter Hain ...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:   Before it was sent was there a warning from 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 229 of 318 
 
the Commission to everybody, specifically from the work 
stream dealing with this matter? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes, in fact there was a letter from 
...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:  Mr Nickson?  
MR WAKEFORD:   Mr Nickson, Alan Nickson, one of the 
investigators who indicated that if anyone distributes the 
prelim report that it would be regarded as a criminal act, 
so Chair fortunately Lord Peter Hain sits on a Board with 
me and he quickly responded and revealed to me what was 
10 
taking place, I then reported it to the Commission, but I 
just you needed to see and know about that Chair just in 
case someone hasn’t alerted you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me just understand that. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say somebody took a document that 
you had submitted to the Commission and gave it to people 
contrary to an order that I had made?  
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Chair to cut to the chase it is in the 
affidavit and in simple lines it doesn’t form part of the 
20 
evidence, it is an internal report by the investigator 
circulated ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, oh. 
MR WILLIS:   Mr Agrizzi in defiance of your order, in 
defiance of the warning, of the rules of this Commission 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 230 of 318 
 
and the warning by Mr Nickson in writing ...[indistinct] an 
affidavit, sent that to Lord Hain in the United Kingdom on 
his parliamentary email address, that is the complaint that 
we have made, I want to ask ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I was not aware of that. 
ADV WILLIS:   It will probably come to your attention at 
some stage again because it is in the Secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   But Mr Wakeford what is complaint, what do 
you believe Mr Agrizzi was doing by doing that? 
10 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair he was, look I sit on the Board of 
DNG which is an energy company, I am Chairman of that 
company, Lord Peter Hain represents us, he sits on the 
Board to represent the foreign stakeholder base, because 
DNG is a gas company it is fairly large and it is headed up 
by the  CEO Aldworth Mbalati, who happens to be someone 
who gives me hope concerning the future of this country, 
and I think he did it to firstly defame me, secondly to cut 
off my income, because it has been a fairly difficult two 
years for me, and thirdly I think it demonstrates his hatred 
20 
for me, which I have always advocated and he has always 
advocated he was my big mate which he wasn’t. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Wakeford you have referred to Mr Peet 
Venter ’s affidavit. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yes.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 231 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:   You gave evidence before the Chairman, 
there is also Mr Andre van Tonder ’s affidavit.  Who was Mr 
Andre van Tonder again, what was his position? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Andries van Tonder was the CFO. 
ADV WILLIS:   And Mr Peet Venter what was his role? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Peet Venter was a tax consultant. 
ADV WILLIS:   He was a tax consultant but he wasn’t 
employed within the company, he was ...[intervenes]  
MR WAKEFORD:   Well he was a – ja an independent 
contractor but virtually employed. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   So they dealt with the financial affairs of 
the company?  
MR WAKEFORD:    100%.  
ADV WILLIS:   I note that neither of them testified against 
you in relatio to matters of tax and BOSASA etcetera. 
MR WAKEFORD:   100%. 
ADV WILLIS:   What do you have to say about that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I guess that would be the last one? 
ADV WILLIS:   One more to the last.   
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair those two individuals yes it is 
20 
correct they did not testify that I was involved with any 
shenanigans with SARS and Chair quite frankly they had 
contracted someone [word cut] out of the country I spoke 
about that this morning, the substance of their SARS 
submissions, I am not a tax professional, never have been, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 232 of 318 
 
never professed to be, but they – in their affidavits they 
make it very clear who did what and those affidavits were 
all crafted strangely enough, if I am not mistaken, most of 
them by Agrizzi himself in November 2017. 
ADV WILLIS:   And if – if there was someone who was to 
assist BOSASA in relation to SARS, something, some plan 
of action, who at BOSASA would have been involved in that 
planning? 
MR WAKEFORD:   It would have been Peet Venter, the 
CFO. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   No, Andries van Tonder was the CFO. 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry Andries van Tonder, and then they 
used 
– 
I 
forget 
the 
guy’s 
name, 
an 
external 
tax 
professional and then they also used Advocate – I forget 
the name – Solomon, Solomon. 
ADV WILLIS:   One – the last question, you spoke of the 
fifth column ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Definitely the last one, that will be the 
last one? 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes, you spoke to the fifth column, for the 
20 
benefit of the Chairman just put the names to who the fifth 
column suggests you say? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Chair the fifth column was Agrizzi, 
clearly the leader of the ...[intervenes]  
ADV WILLIS:   Just the names Mr Wakeford. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 233 of 318 
 
MR WAKEFORD:   Sorry Andries van Tonder, Leon van 
Tonder, Peet Venter and there was one other Chair, I 
cannot remember now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Chair before  I release this microphone 
we would appreciate, I have no doubt and I have not had a 
chance to just mention this to Mr Notshe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV WILLIS:   And I am sure he will do it, but if from your 
side if that could be, a guard could be put in place that this 
10 
affidavit of Mr Wakeford’s is not by way of an error be 
uploaded onto the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV WILLIS:   ...website because it contains the 417 
inquiry extracts and we would not want this matter to be 
blown any more out of proportion than what it needs to be 
and we will make those submissions by twelve o’clock on 
Tuesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I was alive to that but thank you for 
raising it.   Mr Wakeford’s affidavit and I am talking about 
20 
the one to which he deposed – oh – I see it has got – it 
doesn’t have a date but where the date is supposed to be 
put in it is left blank but it says was signed and so on to – 
at Pretoria at on this the dash day of February 2019, I 
thought this is quite recent so I don’t think it is this 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 234 of 318 
 
affidavit. 
ADV WILLIS:   Is that his ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The one that you were using this 
morning. 
ADV WILLIS:   The one that we were using this morning, 
but that was Commissioned in my presence yesterday 
...[indistinct – speaking simultaneously] tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it doesn’t have a date, well it does 
have February 2019, so anyone reading it would think it 
was deposed to in February 2019. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   So maybe for the record Chairman if I could 
just go to the end of that affidavit here, yes so that wasn’t 
corrected, unfortunately this does happen often, so Mr 
Chairman for the record Mr Wakeford earlier on Mr Notshe 
took 
you 
through 
this 
affidavit, 
you 
identified 
your 
signature to the affidavit and the last page is the 
Commissioner ’s signature and his stamp, William Richard 
Creighton, when did you meet Mr Creighton? 
MR WAKEFORD:   Yesterday. 
ADV WILLIS:   Yesterday and what was yesterday’s date? 
20 
MR WAKEFORD:   The 5 t h. 
ADV WILLIS:   Mr Chairman I can confirm that, this 
affidavit was deposed to on the 5 t h, I am going to inscribe 
it on my copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I actually needed the date for 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 235 of 318 
 
purposes of identifying so that whoever might see it they 
must know it is the one that should not be published or put 
out to the public for now, so I am going to say it is an 
affidavit that is marked Exhibit T33, so Mr Notshe will have 
to make sure that it is so marked in terms of the affidavit 
that is in the Commission, so that affidavit is not to be 
published or made available to the public without the 
Chairperson’s written consent until I have made an order 
allowing it to be made up and we contemplate that that 
should not take too long. 
10 
ADV WILLIS:   Yes by twelve o’clock Tuesday the 
submission will be before you and thereafter either it will 
go up as is or it will be redacted appropriately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV WILLIS:   Thank you Mr Chairman, I think we – I say 
on behalf of at least the three counsel and legal teams that 
have been here before you today thank you for your 
indulgence and your patience, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Thank you to 
everybody for your cooperation, we will – I will now adjourn 
20 
the day session of the Commission proceedings, I will take 
a fifteen minute adjournment and then I will come back to 
start the evening session with regard to evidence relating 
to the Free State Provincial Government, so thank you to 
everybody for their cooperation. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 236 of 318 
 
ADV WILLIS:   Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   Just one aspect, just for 
record purposes, we will be providing besides Tuesday as 
agreed between myself and my learned friends, we will 
also be doing a responding affidavit because there is – and 
we will deal with the main points, but a lot of unfortunate 
personal attacks and venom from Mr Wakeford that we will 
just shortly deal with and that will also be in our 
responding affidavit just for record purposes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fine. 
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   And Mr Agrizzi will be filing 
and in regards to what is now being coached on with 
respect we will deal with that as well in our responding 
affidavit. 
 
Thank you for your time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much. 
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   Sorry I was requested to 
remove my mask, so I just hope it came out clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I did hear you ja, I did hear you.  
20 
Thank you very much. 
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   We were going to arrange 
dates between the respective parties to do a response, we 
don’t to further burden it but in view of Mr Wakeford’s 
personal attacks and the venom that he came out with 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 237 of 318 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s ...[intervenes]  
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   It has to be dealt with and we 
will ...[indistinct – speaking simultaneously] in the main 
points. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You will respond ja.    
 
We adjourn. 
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL:   Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good evening Ms September, good 
evening everybody. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Good evening Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are you ready? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes we are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Chair today the witness before you is 
that of Mr Kopung Frans Ralikontsane. He is the Director 
General of the Office of the Premier of the Free State.  To 
20 
locate his evidence it is important for me to place the 
following on record.   
 
His evidence is located as arising out of the evidence 
of Mr Mxolisi Dukwana who testified before this commission 
on the 5t h of April 2019 and again on the 27t h and 28t h of 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 238 of 318 
 
August 2019. 
 
Mr 
Dukwana’s 
testimony 
was 
based 
on 
three 
affidavits.  One of those affidavits dated the 27t h of June 
2019 referred to Mr Ralikontsane and it was pursuant to that 
that he received a Rule 3.3 Notice together with relevant 
extracts for the affidavit plus one annexure.   
 
In a nutshell Mr Dukwana alleged – alleges rather 
that Mr Ralikontasane was involved in a project which he 
termed International Scholarship Program and which he 
informed is one the Free State Provincial Government 
10 
projects that Mr Dukwana deemed to be an act of state 
capture at the behest of and I quote this 
“At the behest of all politically sponsored by 
the then  Premier of the Free State Mr Elias 
Sekgobela Magashule.” 
The allegations against this witness are essentially 
centralised to this particular project termed the International 
Scholarship Program and the operation of that program. 
 
This witness applied to give evidence before this 
commission and his application was granted.  It is important 
20 
to just place on record that in his affidavit which founds the 
application the witness initially took issue with having 
received only extracts of the affidavit but he appreciated that 
the Rules permitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is Mr Ralikontsane legally represented? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 239 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes Chair he is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us allow his legal representative to 
place himself or herself on record. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  As Chair pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may do that from where you are if your 
mic is working.   
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  I think it is working Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair my name is 00:03:09 and I 
indeed am representing Mr Ralikontsane on instructions of 
10 
00:03:17. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  Thank you. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   As you please. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  In relation to the issue that was taken it 
is no longer an issue based on the submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the issue? What was the issue 
that was raised? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  The witness in his affidavit took issue 
with the fact that he only received certain extracts of the 
affidavit and only one annexure.  He wanted the entire 
20 
affidavit.  But in his affidavit itself he concedes that it was in 
fact within the Rules to permit him only receiving part of it 
and in any event Chair the entire exhibit for Mr Mxolisi 
Dukwana is in fact on the Chair – on the commission’s 
website. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 240 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja well the question is whether he was 
given all that he needed to be given. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes Chair he was given the relevant 
extracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he – he has no complaints at the 
moment about not having being given some portions of the 
affidavit that he might have thought were necessary as far as 
you know? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  As far as I know no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair if I may ask this? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   The point that was raised with the 
lack of pull I trusted of Mr Dukwana’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Was that they were extracts of that 
affidavit that I believed – my learned colleague deemed 
necessary or relevant to Mr Ralikontsane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   But what then appeared that we had 
20 
was that we did not know what was said before any of those. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Extracts and hence the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   For full affidavit which was never 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 241 of 318 
 
provided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But at this stage do you have any 
concerns that you might not have been given everything you 
were supposed to get or there is no concern – you accept 
that .. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   We do not have concern in as far as 
if indeed the line of questioning stays within the bounds of 
what has been revealed to the – to the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay no.  Because the important thing 
is simple whether by virtue of the absence of whatever 
10 
documents you were not given you are ambit in... 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In being heard but probably if you were 
hampered you would have said look we cannot respond to 
this because it is clear that there is an annexure which we 
have not been given and then you would insisted on that I 
would imagine. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   More so also Chair if one looks at 
the reply that was provided to Mr Dukwana it indeed it 
elicited any other issues that were not covered in the main 
20 
affidavit and as I said if indeed the questioning is not 
confined to what is before the witness then of course that 
concern will be raised.  One does not come here pre-empting 
exactly the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 242 of 318 
 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   That you are going to be asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine. So if there are any 
issues we will hear and take it from there. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Indeed so Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Chair before you there are two bundles.  
There is one lever arch bundle which is marked on the spine 
as Exhibit X8 forming part of the FS22 bundle contains the 
witness’ statement and together with… 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is Bundle FS22. 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes Chair and that puts… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the – that is the only bundle I have. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And that bundle in itself contains both 
the statement of the witness together with an affidavit which 
was deposed to one year later which is substantially the 
same to the statement provided together Mr Dukwana’s 
response to that and some other documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is Mr Dukwana’s original affidavit? 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  His original affidavit and in particular 
relevant extracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one where he – he would have – is it 
the one at page 145? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  No Chair the one at page 1- bear with 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 243 of 318 
 
me the page – the one at page 145 is Mr Dukwana’s 
response to the witness’ application papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well there is one 244. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  The one at… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Starting at 246 which was done in 2019 
that must be the one? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Correct Chair. And that excerpts of his 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV 
SEPTEMBER: 
 
It 
also 
contains 
some 
additional 
10 
information relative to the statements.  What you will also 
find before Chair is a small bundle. It is bound with steel 
binder of sorts and it is this little bundle that the legal team 
would like to rely on in that it contains documents that was 
brought to the legal team’s attention during the course of 
last week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it has got a memo that is addressed 
to me.  It cannot have something that is addressed to me 
and it is not given to the other – to the witness’ legal team. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  The bundle of documents was in fact 
20 
given to the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the memo to me?  If it is before me 
then it must be before them as well. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  I am not sure what memo Chair is 
referring to. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 244 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is written by you. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  If that is the memo that Chair refers to 
of yesterday then that is certainly not before the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is dated 4 – 4 May 2021. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I should not have anything here that is 
not public. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  I am not quite sure why that memo is 
there Chair but having said that following the discussions we 
had yesterday we have in fact prepared a condonation 
10 
application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well … 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Relevant to this little bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have taken that memo out because 
obviously it was not meant to be part of the application. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when you put something here you have 
to know that it is has got – they have got to have that.  You 
do not put here something that is meant for me only. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  I was not aware of the – I was not aware 
20 
that the memo was still before you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But whatever is here. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You must have seen – you must make sure 
you see what it is in front of me as the evidence leader. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 245 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because anything that is put here must be 
because you have said it should be put here because you 
are the evidence leader you know what I am going to need. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That must be before me so nobody must 
put before me something that you do not know because you 
are the evidence leader. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Apologies then for that memo being 
before you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So when I see something here. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It ought not to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I assume you have caused it to be put 
here.  So tell me what is the story about the small bundle? 
ADV 
SEPTEMBER: 
 
Chair 
the 
small 
bundle 
contains 
documents that was provided to the legal team last week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By who? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  By one of the investigators in the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Unfortunately the legal team or not the 
legal team but the evidence leaders to this witness – to this 
evidence does 
not 
have the 
support 
of 
an 
allocated 
investigator. 
 
Notwithstanding 
that 
we 
received 
those 
documents the documents were then considered and the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 246 of 318 
 
relevance of those documents to the evidence of this witness 
was found to be critical.  In considering those documents it 
was established that in context of the evidence it is possible 
that some people may be implicated in the evidence of this 
witness.   
As a precautionary step and in being prudent to the 
leading of this evidence the evidence leaders decided to 
send Rule 3.3 Notices to six people who may be implicated 
by the evidence.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And where are those Rule 3.3 Notices? 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  The Rule 3.3 Notice – as in a copy of 
the 3.3 Notices Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  If you could just bear with me. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   If I understand my learned 
colleague correctly.  She seems to be saying that the 
evidence that might – is going to led might be of implicated 
matter to some people. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   But the evidence of this evidence is 
already before the commission in – of answering affidavit to 
(speaking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, she is saying it is additional 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 247 of 318 
 
evidence that … 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   I am coming to that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   The – she also has mentioned the 
affidavit 
– 
these 
documents 
were 
delivered 
to 
the 
commission only last week and were considered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   This witness has not had a chance 
– a chance at all to consult with legal because they were 
only (talking over one another). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am still going to raise with her.  I am 
still going to raise that with her. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Bundle of documents was immediately 
sent to this witness and then it was subsequently sent to the 
state attorney’s office who is representing this witness.  That 
was done on Monday. Rule 3.3’s were prepared and within 
the confines of the limited resources that we have having 
redactions being done to certain annexures it was then sent 
20 
off on Tuesday by no later than half past one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This appears to be letters.  These appear 
to be correspondence and some invoices and so on.  Is that 
right? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It is a … 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 248 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Emails. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It is a compilation of emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Predominantly some letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you want to… 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And also a transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you want to use – to question the 
witness on them? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In relation to what he is going to be giving 
10 
evidence about? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the difficulty is that I do not – I do not 
know what – what they are about.  Can you tell me what they 
are about?  I am not – you think they are critical I might not 
think they are even relevant I do not know you see and when 
you come with them so late – and is there a witness who 
have testified about them? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you see. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And it is – it is as a consequence of the 
fact that we do not have an investigator we had Ms Rang – 
Beitseng Rangata who had provided an affidavit which just 
not only set the context for the evidence the relevance of the 
evidence, the authenticity of the evidence, the source of the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 249 of 318 
 
documents but certainly gave clarity to how important that 
evidence is to this line of evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no I do not think you should use 
this evidence today. Get it done properly.  If the witness – if 
he – if I consider it is important enough the witness might 
come back or the witness might be asked to depose to an 
affidavit to deal with whatever arises from them.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  It is just too short notice.  I do not 
know what is involved. No witness has given evidence about 
10 
them from what you say. They – you say you sent them – you 
sent this to the state attorney on what – on Monday 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes to both the witness himself and to 
the state attorney. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay no I think it will have to be dealt 
with differently. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Might I even be permitted to place on 
record how that evidence is in fact relevant to the evidence 
of today? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I think let us deal with that later on 
20 
otherwise it is new – I have not seen it – I do not know if 
they have seen it – no witness has testified about it.  It just 
needs to be dealt with in a proper way – in a different way.  
For now let us deal with what we can today.  It is in the 
evening I have – we have already kept everybody waiting 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 250 of 318 
 
because of the day session.  It is twenty past seven.  If we 
are going to take another thirty minutes about the application 
we will – we will not start.   
So let it be looked at properly and then I can be – I 
can be advised – I can be informed of exactly what the story 
is and who – whether there should be another witness who 
testifies to it or whether the witness – this witness should be 
asked to depose to an affidavit and deal with the issues.  
You will have to apply your mind to that. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Well we certainly did Chair which is why 
10 
we placed the bundle before you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You did what? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Apply our mind as to whether or not we 
would like this witness to comment to those documents 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not – it is enough notice that is the 
problem.  I do not know what is in there and I do not want to 
sit here and start dealing with that instead of dealing with 
the issues that we called this witness for.   
You see.  I said this witness should come because he 
made an application – he made an application to adduce 
20 
evidence.  That application I have granted.  Now you want to 
ask him some questions that is legitimate but it comes so 
late.  I have not looked at it – at this.   
So do not deal with it today – this evening; apply 
your mind as to how as it can be dealt with.  I am saying one 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 251 of 318 
 
approach is to ask him to prepare an affidavit and deal with 
whatever issues arise from that correspondence.  Okay.  
There might be another way but you can deal with that later. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  As it pleases Chair.  There is one last 
bundle before you and that is relating to evidence that was 
previously presented before this commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not have a third bundle. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It is Exhibit X7 which is the evidence of 
Ms Cholotta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but it does not need to be given to me 
10 
now if – unless you are going to start with it. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  No we will not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Let us get started with – with his 
evidence. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Unless there is anything else?  If the 
witness could be sworn in please? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja 
please 
administer 
the 
oath 
or 
affirmation. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Mr Ralikontsane would you prefer the 
oath or the affirmation? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the Registrar would have checked. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  I will take an oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The Registrar would have checked 
what he will take.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 252 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Kopung Frans Ralikontsane. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence you 
will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
10 
God. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Ralikontsane and thank you 
for availing yourself to assist the commission.  Okay alright.  
You can then start Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Mr Ralikontsane – thank you Chair.  Mr 
Ralikontsane before you is a bundle which is marked Exhibit 
8 and I have just reminded myself that with your leave if 
Exhibit H could be admitted into the record please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it cannot be admitted until you have 
20 
done the formalities.  Do the formalities first. 
ADV 
SEPTEMBER: 
 
Sure 
Chair. 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
Mr 
Ralikontsane if I could ask you to turn to page 4.   
CHAIRPERSON:  She will be making use of the black 
numbers on the top left of each page Mr Ralikontsane.  So 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 253 of 318 
 
when she says page 4 it is – you will find it as 004 – FS22-
004 but she will just say 4.  Okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  I was made aware Chair so… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Sir do you recognise this document? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Yes I do. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Can I ask you to turn to page 27 please.  
Is it correct that that is your signature? 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Yes that is my signature. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And so this document is a statement 
that you then signed on the 23 rd of August 2019 is that 
correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Can I ask you to turn to page 63 please.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry this is not an affidavit but a 
statement is that right?  I thought it was an affidavit. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It is in fact a statement Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is a statement Mr Ralikontsane and not 
20 
an affidavit is that right?  You did not take an oath when you 
signed this aff – this document, is that right? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Ja that was a statement Chair 
responding to the Rule 3.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 254 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  And then later on I deposed to an 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you did and confirm what is in the 
statement? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Yes.  The page 63 that we have been 
directed to now it is my… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Continue Ms 
September. 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  At page 63 is it correct that you do 
recognise this to be your document Sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Yes I do Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Can I ask you turn to page 79 then.  At 
the top of 79 is that your signature Sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  I confirm that is my signature 
Chairperson. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And so it is correct that you deposed to 
this affidavit before a Commissioner of Oaths on the 7t h of 
August 2020? 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Chair – no – apologies.  Sir subject to 
any corrections that you may address during this hearing do 
you confirm that what is stated in your statement and the 
affidavit is true and correct? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 255 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Yes I confirm that. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  With your leave Chair may this bundle 
then be admitted as Exhibit X8? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not the bundle the statement on its own 
and the affidavit on its own.  Does the statement have 
annexures? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Yes it does Chair both the statement 
and the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON: What exhibit number must the statement 
be? 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  The statement subject to you Chair 
could be marked Exhibit X8a. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see it can be just X8 because the 
affidavit is not an attachment to the statement is it not. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  No it is not Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is on its own – is there – is there an 
Exhibit X9 that is – that already exists? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  No not as far as I am aware Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then the statement will be Exhibit X8 and 
then the affidavit will be Exhibit X9 together with its 
20 
annexures.  The statement by Mr Kopung Frans Ralikontsane 
which starts at page 4 together with its annexures will be 
admitted as Exhibit X8 and the affidavit of Mr Kopung Frans 
Ralikontsane that starts at page 63 will admitted together 
with its annexures as Exhibit X9.  Okay. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 256 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Ralikontsane is it 
correct that when you provided your statement you provided 
it in response to the Rule 3.3 Notice that you received out of 
the evidence of Mr Mxolisi Dukwana? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  And is it also correct that in your 
statement itself if I may turn you or direct you sorry to page 
5 of this bundle.  It is page 5. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Oh page 5 of the [?]. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Not tab 5 Sir. 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Sorry. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Page 5. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Oh page 5 of the – page 5. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Paragraph 4 on page 5 informs that this 
is just a short statement before the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say paragraph 4? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Paragraph 4 on page 5 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not have paragraph 4 on page 5. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  1.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got 1.4. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  Oh sorry I scratched over 1 – apologies 
it is 1.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  At page – paragraph 1.4 humble 
apologies.   
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 257 of 318 
 
“You were informed that this short statement 
is a summary of the full version that I present 
at a later stage.  I would request the 
evidence leaders to draw Mr Dukwana’s 
attention to my version detailing events in 
this statement.” 
And it is then pursuant to this statement that you filed the 
affidavit which has now been accepted as Exhibit X9.  Is that 
correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  If we can then work from Exhibit X9 and 
in doing so I will take you to parts of the statement which 
may not necessarily be incorporated or may differ from the 
affidavit in itself.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You know Ms September it might work 
faster this way because as far as I recall the whole issue 
that 
concerned 
Mr 
Ralikontsane 
is 
the 
issue 
of 
the 
scholarship the 00:28:32.  Maybe – it might be faster if  
1. We let him talk – give evidence about the role and 
function of the Director General in the Premier’s office 
20 
which appears at page 6 and – and he can talk about 
the basic values which are at page 8 and then he then 
tells me what he would like to tell me about the 
scholarship scheme – the bursary scheme. 
When he is done then you can put questions to him and 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 258 of 318 
 
direct him to whatever you might wish to ask him on.  I think 
it might be quicker that way.  Is that fine with you? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  It certainly aligns with the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:  I had planned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So let us do that way.  Mr 
Ralikontsane do you want to tell me about the role and 
function of a DG in the Premier’s office? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:  Thanks Chair I have in my statement 
indicated that as head of the Department of Office of the  
10 
Premier I am responsible for efficient management and 
administration effective utilisation and training of staff, 
maintenance of discipline, provide – promotion [word cut] 
relation, proper use and care of state property and then in 
addition to any power or duty entrust that was signed by or 
under the Public Service Act or any other law to the head 
of the department of the Office of the Premier.  I am also 
the Secretary of the Executive Council by virtue of being 
the DG in the Office of the Premier and subject to Section 
85(2) and 125(e) of the Constitution. 
20 
 
I am also responsible for integral relations on 
administrative level between the relevant province and 
other provinces, as well as, national departments and 
national 
government 
components 
and 
also 
for 
intra 
government.  I am in between the Office of the Premier and 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 259 of 318 
 
the department in the province and I am also continue to 
coordinate 
activities 
of 
government 
including 
the 
legislation that might be affected.  So Chair, that is 
basically it in terms of my responsibilities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the values and principles of 
governing administration, do you want to tell me anything 
but obviously I can see that that comes from Section 195 
of the Constitution but is there something that you want to 
emphasise there? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair.  I think I have brought 
10 
them forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Because of the issues that were 
tabled, 
I 
had 
to 
indicate 
that 
in 
executing 
my 
responsibilities all the time, I am aligned(?) 195 of the 
Constitution to promote efficient, economic and effective 
use of resources and also to provide services importantly, 
fairly, 
equally 
and 
without 
bias 
to 
make 
Public 
Administration accountable and also to foster transparency 
between – by providing the public with timely, accessible 
20 
and accurate information in terms of Section 195(1)(a) of 
the Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair.  And I am also then the 
Accounting Officer of the Office of the Premier. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 260 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   As I had indicated and directed on 
accounting matters by the Public Finance Management Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And then just tell me in your own 
words what these bursary programme was, scholarship 
scheme was all about.  That I have heard evidence about 
from Mr Dukwana and other witnesses in the Provincial 
Government of the Free State and particularly in the 
Premier ’s office because my understanding is that it was a 
programme or a programme that was driven by the 
10 
Premier ’s Office.  That is the understanding. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Chair, if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   I do have a few questions of clarity in 
relation to the role and the responsibilities of this witness 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You have come ...[intervenes]  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   ...in order to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You will come back to him when she – he 
is finished, then I will give you a lot of time.  Then you can 
20 
ask him from the role of the DG and the values and 
everything.  Then it will be quicker. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So you will be able – when he is 
done, to ask him on any aspect. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 261 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, I have indicated where the 
bursary programme comes from.  It is over 20-years now.  
It is from the nearly the year 2000 or it could be earlier 
when the Free State Provincial Government started an 
aggressive programme of bursaries to students.  And it 
went on until in 2014 when we introduced what we call an 
International Bursary Programme.   
 
So the original programme from 2000 up to 
10 
nearly 2014 was based on local universities and our 
primary focus was on our two universities in the province, 
the Free State students admitted at the Free State 
University 
and 
students 
that 
we 
get 
at 
the 
Central 
University of Technology.  That was basically our focus but 
it progressed until we were able to also find students 
outside the province that were also in other universities in 
the country.  That was the provincial one.   
 
So the international one started in 2014 when 
the Executive Council of the Free State resolved to take 
20 
the students abroad.  This was after an extensive visit of 
the Executive Council since 2011, between 2010/2011 to 
various countries.  And every time we would visit those 
countries the Executive Council would also ensure that 
amongst are members of the Bursary Technical Committee 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 262 of 318 
 
who are part of the team of the Premier visiting a particular 
country or MEC’s designated so that we could... 
 
We will always request an embassy to ensure 
that we have universities in that country, a visit that they 
are able to engage with to be part of our country in visiting 
those universities and starting to negotiate.  So the 
negotiations 
about 
international 
bursaries 
started 
in 
2012/2013 and the actual of the programme was in 2014.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Is that all you wanted to 
say about the ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I want ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the bursary scheme? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I want to mention further Chair that 
when we came into this programme, we started broadening 
our thinking not only to be confined to students that would 
be later on working for government.  Our intention was now 
to broaden the Free State, a net of people that could be 
able to offer proper skills and therefore we were then able 
to understand our bursary to an extent where we would 
look at people that can provide scares skills not only to 
20 
government but in the province, broadly speaking.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And how long have you been Director 
General in the Premier ’s Office? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
Since 
2013, 
September 
Chairperson.  2013. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 263 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Ralikontsane, 
you have just confirmed that you have been there since 
1 September 2013 in the Office of – in the position of DG 
in the Office of the Premier.  It is correct thought that 
before 
that 
from 
the 
11 t h 
of 
March 
2013 
until 
the 
31 s t of August, you in fact acted in that position before you 
were permanently appointed.  Is that correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now how long Mr Ralikontsane were you 
10 
– have you been working for the Free State Provincial 
Government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I have worked for the Free State 
Provincial Government since – at a higher level or any 
other level? 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you started. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Ja.  Maybe I will start when I joined 
the Free State Provincial Government.  I re-joined it again 
in 
2005 
as 
Head 
of 
the 
Department 
for 
Corporate 
Governance and Provincial Affairs and Human Settlement 
20 
but then it was called the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Housing.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:   So you have been part of the 
provincial government for several years? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 264 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   There is something that I would like 
you to explain to me or rather to the Chair.  You have given 
an overview of what your role and responsibilities are.  In 
paragraph 7.3 of your affidavit your clearly assert and I will 
read it to you.  You say: 
“I am representing the Office of the Executive 
Head of the Province, i.e. the Premier before 
this Commission...” 
 
Now in order for us to fully appreciate the 
evidence you give to the Commission, I think it is important 
10 
for you to explain to us the practical role and the reporting 
structures of the DG in the architecture of the Free State 
Provincial structure.  To assist this discussion, can I ask 
that you look at the Reference Bundle before you? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The one I have now? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Yes, it would be marked FS-23. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think he would be able to answer 
that question without looking at anything.  He knows who 
he reports to. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   No problem Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who do you report to? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I report to the Premier of the Free 
State Province. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 265 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   If I may then refer to this document?   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   It is a document that we took the 
liberty of printing from the official website of the Premier of 
the Office of the Free State.  You are welcome to follow if 
you so wish.  It is at page 501 of the Reference Bundle. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   What it highlights in here is parts of 
what you have already mentioned.  That is – that there 
10 
essentially four main roles, if I am understanding this 
correctly.  The one is: 
1. You 
are 
the 
Accounting 
Officer 
of 
the 
Department of the Premier.   
2. You 
are 
the 
Head 
of 
the 
Provincial 
Administration of the Free State. 
3. You are the Secretary of the Executive 
Council 
and 
you 
coordinate 
the 
implementation 
of 
Exco 
resolutions 
and 
decisions. 
20 
4. You are the Chairperson of the Forum of 
Heads of Departments and you coordinate 
the 
implementation 
of 
those 
decisions, 
recommendations and programmes. 
 
Is that correct? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 266 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   That certainly presents a broad scope 
of your role and responsibilities in that it, if I am 
understanding it correctly and please correct me if I am 
wrong, it deals with matters relating to the executive and 
the administration within the province.  Am I understanding 
correctly? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Now are there any matters then that 
fall within the provincial government that you would not be 
10 
officially informed of by virtue of these expansive roles that 
you hold? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There would be issues, matters that 
take place Chair in the departments and there would be 
matters that would be deliberated on at Forums of Heads of 
Departments which I will be aware of and then there would 
be matters that I would have served in the Executive 
Council which I would be aware of and my role would be to 
ensure that the decisions of the Forum of Heads of 
Department and the decisions of the Executive Council are 
20 
carried out.  That is how far I would be able to have an 
understanding of what is going on in government. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Would it be a fair statement to say 
that you have a general overview of the executive issues in 
relation to the Free State Government as well as the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 267 of 318 
 
administration 
issues 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
Free 
State 
Government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Who reports to you?  And excuse my 
ignorance on this.  We accept that you report to the 
Premier of the province but who – which positions report to 
you, sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I have three Deputy Director 
Generals who report to me.  One is for Planning and/or 
matters related to Planning and Strategy Planning and 
10 
Overall Integrated Planning in the province.  One would be 
responsible for Corporate Administration and one would be 
responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation.  The fourth 
direct report would be the Chief Financial Officer who may 
not necessarily be at the level of the DG but reports 
directly to me.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you, sir.  One thing which 
puzzled me a little in this document is that reference is 
made to what is called a Special Project Unit.  Can you 
please explain to the Chair what is this insofar as it 
20 
concerns your role within the province? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The integrated planning component 
had 
a 
component 
called 
Special 
Projects 
and 
this 
emanated from what is called Strategically Infrastructure 
Programmes of government of National Government which 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 268 of 318 
 
we adopted with the National Development Plan.  So the 
strategic projects would actually be evaluated from that 
perspective in terms of the component as far as what we 
called 
- 
as 
far 
as 
the 
Infrastructure 
Projects 
are 
concerned. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And when was this unit established? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms September, remember that this whole 
thing is about the bursary scheme, the scholarship scheme.  
So as you put your questions, just bear in mind that is 
what I am really interested in, the bursary scheme, the 
10 
scholarship 
scheme. 
 
Give 
him 
the 
evidence 
that 
Mr Dukwana gave about how the bursary scheme or 
scholarship scheme was being handled.  So as you ask 
questions, I am just saying just bear that in mind.  That is 
what I am really interested in. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   I will certain...  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Well, I will move on then.  If I could 
ask you to turn to page 74?   
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Go back to the ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Oh, sorry.  Page 74 of the main 
bundle which is X-8.   
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Okay.  Page 74? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   [No audible reply]  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, I am there Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 269 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   At paragraph 4.18 you talk about your 
authorisation in terms of Regulation 77: 
“To grant financial or any assistance for study 
training or research for part-time or fulltime 
activities 
at 
either 
local 
or 
international 
institutions...”   
 
You go further to state that: 
“I am also authorised to grant bursaries to 
both employees and non-employees...” 
 
Who do you mean by non-employees? 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Non-employees are students.  That 
would be students that would have applied for bursaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is students who are not employed 
by ...[intervenes]  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That will be the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...the 
government, 
Provincial 
Government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Ja, that would be students who 
have gone through their matric and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   ...that would be non-employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the scholarship programme, 
bursary programme.  Did you have employees of the 
Provincial Government who would be granted scholarships 
or bursaries to go and study and come back and continue 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 270 of 318 
 
with their employment with the Provincial Government or 
were these scholarships always simply granted to people, 
to students who were not at that stage employed by 
government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Most instances it has been students 
– I mean employees who were studying on part-time. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Employees 
of 
the 
Provincial 
Government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Of the Provincial Government 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   ...studying on part-time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is why you would distinguish 
between employees and non-employees? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...some of the people who would be 
granted 
scholarships 
would 
be 
people 
who 
are 
not 
employed by the Provincial Government but others would 
be the employed by the Provincial Government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Precisely.  Because we had a part-
20 
time bursary for employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   And the case in point here that 
Advocate September is referring to is with regard to a 
specific employees ...[intervenes]  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 271 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   ...that were sent outside of the 
country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you, Chair.  The reason why it 
puzzles me a little is that Regulation 77 specifically talks 
to employment matters and to the extent that it refers to 
non-employees by cross-reference.  It refers to people who 
have been identified as part of the operational needs, if I 
can call it that, within government.  Would that then be the 
10 
confines of non-employees as you have suggested in your 
paragraph? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, but it goes further into our 
policy.  We indicate that we would be looking also at 
discretion in addressing skills across the province. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were you the official of the government 
who had the power to grant or refuse a request for 
bursaries or scholarships? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   This only came to the Office of the 
Premier.  This was basically centralised in education. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   For some time, I would say since 
2009/2010 
Chair 
that 
this 
was 
centralised 
in 
the 
Department of Education. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 272 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   And around twenty... it was 
December 2017, this was then centralised to the Office of 
the Premier in relieving the Department of Education to 
concentrate on a score mandate of basic education.  And 
when this was looked at, it was found but the bursary 
programme then could be in the Office of the Premier for 
some employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am – I find – what I find 
interesting is your reason why it was taken away from the 
Department of Education.  It says to allow the Department 
10 
of Education to focus on its core function.  But the 
Department of Education, if any department is the most 
suitable one to deal with bursaries because bursaries is 
about education.   
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   What then happened was the 
portion of education for non-employees was almost seemed 
to be a burden in terms of the focus that education was 
having. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   And to ensure that this was, I would 
say linked further with the work that we were doing in the 
integral mandated relation component in the Premier ’s 
department, the Executive Council decided that this – from 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 273 of 318 
 
2017 this function will actually come to the Office of the 
Premier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They decided that it should be the 
Premier ’s Office that should be burdened with this. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as opposed to the Department of 
Education, they decided that rather than burden the 
Department for Education with this task they should burden 
the Premier ’s Office. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I had my own views Chair but it was 
10 
resolved ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   ...the Office of the Premier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you, Chair.  Now may be a 
prudent time for us to look at the policies you provided to 
the Commission a little bit closer.  If I could ask you to turn 
to page 155? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Do you recognise this document? 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I recognise this document.  This is 
an Executive Council resolution. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And it is correct then that this is in 
relation to a provincial bursary policy which was adopted at 
the Cabinet meeting on the 19 t h of November 2008? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 274 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   At the bottom of this page, it is noted 
that it has been signed off by the Premier on the 
9 t h of December 2008 in addition to the Secretary of the 
Executive Council on the 3 r d of the twelfth 2008.   
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Paragraph – page 161 of this bundle 
and in particular Clause 5.  At Clause 5, 5.1 appears to 
identify the different methods of financial assistance which 
is listed as: 
10 
- fulltime bursary,  
- part-time bursary,  
- fulltime study aid,  
- study on assignment,  
- chancellor and takeover of bursary with 
study loan obligations.   
 
What follows on this is that each of those 
methods which you obviously would know about, better 
than me, the criteria for each of these methods are being 
outlined.  Is it correct that this policy does not regulate 
20 
international bursaries? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, at that time this – we later 
amended our policy in 2014/2015 but then signed off in 
2016 to provide for international bursaries. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And in furtherance of what you are 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 275 of 318 
 
saying, can I then ask you to turn to page 198, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number Ms September? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   198. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Are you there, sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Mr Ralikontsane, the salient features 
of this document – or before we go there.  Is it correct that 
this document is titled as Subject Amendment of the 
Provincial Bursary Policy? 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And is it also correct that it was 
signed off on the 16 t h of May 2016? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Who signed off on this policy? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It was signed off by the Director 
General and the Premier. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And would that Director General be 
yourself, sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That would be myself. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   So that is your signature as it appears 
on page 199? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And who was the Premier at the time? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The Premier was Premier Ace 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 276 of 318 
 
Magashule.   
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you.  The salient features of 
this document, which hopefully you can help us unpack a 
little, is if we look at – if we go back to page 198 and we 
look at paragraph 1(b): 
“The purpose of this document is to obtain 
approval: 
b.  
That the amended policy be applied 
to applications received for the 2015 and later 
academic years...” 
10 
 
That, however, appears to be in contradiction 
with paragraph 5 on page 199 which reads that: 
“The amended Provincial Bursary Policy will be 
distributed to all provincial departments for 
implementation, for applications for the 2016 
academic 
year 
onwards 
on 
approval 
by 
Exco...” 
 
What is the correct year from which this policy 
applied, sir? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The policy effectively became 
20 
applicable in 2016 and I think we were actually – with point 
A dealing with the previous year also on matters that we 
would already have identified students especially those 
that would have been part of an internationally bursary 
programme for 2015. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 277 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Okay.  What is important about this 
document or at least what appears to be, is that the 
context for this document is set out in paragraph 2 on page 
198 where it informs that: 
“The Provincial Bursary Policy was approved 
in November 2008...” 
 
And that is the document that we referred to 
earlier.  Is that correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Yes. 
10 
“Due to the changes on the allocation of 
bursaries it is therefore necessary to amend 
the policy to suit the present environment in 
capacitating and empowering the free status. 
The process to review the policy commenced 
during 2014...” 
 
Are we then to understand that it took two years 
to finalise an amended policy? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, there has been consultation 
around 
that 
process 
because 
the 
intention 
was 
to 
20 
understand the operations of the international bursary in 
particular Chair because this was purely based on an 
Executive Council resolution and we wanted to bring this 
now into a policy.  So there would have been earlier 
consultation late 2014 and 2015 in the department or in 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 278 of 318 
 
government here really and it was – it only found space to 
be – to serve in the Executive Council for consideration 
and then approved finally on – in May 2016. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And in furtherance then of what you 
say it aligns to the motivation at paragraph 4(c) on page 
199 which informs that: 
“The major amendments made to the policy 
are as follows: 
See in particular being the allocation [word 
cut] and International Bursaries.” 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Now in the context of the allegations 
in relation – rather, in the context of Mr Dukwana’s 
allegations 
regarding 
the 
international 
scholarship 
programme we are then to understand that there was no 
policy that applied to international bursaries before this 
policy. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I would say so.  As I have 
indicated, Chair, the resolutions of the executive council 
do serve as guidance until a policy is finalised. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the answer is yes to the question but 
you then add the resolutions of the executive committee 
provide guidance when there is no policy. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Following your evidence given earlier 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 279 of 318 
 
which informed the international bursary scheme was 
initiated in 2014, which you recorded in your affidavit, 
please help us to understand how international bursaries 
were then granted when there was no policy in place until 
2016? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I had indicated that this issue of 
providing international bursaries Chair – the discussions 
started around 2012.  With the 2011/2012 with visits to 
various 
countries 
and 
in 
2014 
we 
already 
had 
an 
opportunity to send a few students to Turkey and I think a 
10 
few students to China at a particular time which were the 
countries that already – universities that were already 
visited by the team of the Premier and members of the 
executive council and some members of the bursary 
technical team and with that, after that visit and reports 
received, Exco resolved that we could actually start with 
the international bursary programme. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    So what selection or qualification 
criteria, for example, would have been applied on the 
awarding of an international bursary?  Who would be 
20 
eligible to apply for an international bursary?  How was it 
regulated? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Almost – the criteria was almost 
similar to the local bursary, I would say, broadly speaking.  
The fact was only that now students are going to be abroad 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 280 of 318 
 
and the second aspect that we had to bring in was that we 
are looking at Indian students and if we were looking at 
Indian students, how are they going to survive broad if we 
have only paid for tuition, accommodation and all other 
related issues, how are they going to survive on a 
purchase of necessities that are needed and that we 
brought in what we called a stipend into that part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That talks to the amount. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That talks to the amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But her question is on how – what 
10 
criteria you used. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   We applied the same criteria as 
what we do with the local bursaries, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms September? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Can you please then take us to 
where we would find an outline of what those criteria would 
be? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Just go back to policy, your pages 
are confusing me.  Let us go back to the policy. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    No problem.  Which policy are you 
20 
looking for, Sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the policy is at page 157, Bursary 
Policy Framework for the Free State Provincial  
Government. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, 157. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 281 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    That was the first one and then the 
second one, if I may just add to that, would start on page 
170. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Ja, fulltime bursary holders, that is 
the criteria.  That would be selection criteria …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, is it the one at 157 that helps 
you or is it the other one? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The 1.163, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   163.  Well, that is the page. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Ja and we could also go to the 
10 
amended one if that is helpful to the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So the criteria are set out at page 
163. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
“The selection criteria are included in the Persal 
computer programme, get determined the point and 
where to be allocated to each category of the 
following criteria and disability, the state resident 
income of parent.” 
20 
Do you know whether that – I guess that income, R40 000, 
R70 000 obviously has to be per annum? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That would be per annum, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because if it was not then they 
would not be indigent.  Number of children....  Yes, okay, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 282 of 318 
 
that is where the criteria are to be found. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms September? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   If we go further, if it is on 
internationally bursary, it can then – that is why I say the 
criteria remains almost the same.  We had brought in the 
international 
bursaries 
in 
our 
new 
policy 
in 
2016, 
Chairperson, and bursaries for international students are 
awarded to the Free State citizens to address the shortage 
of skills in the province, to identify deserving student in 
10 
terms of the criteria approved by Exco, which is the criteria 
that is in the policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    But with respect, Mr Ralikontsane, if 
you are referring to page 184 – unless... 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I am in page 184. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Were you referring to page 184? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   184. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    And in particular clause 7.1.4? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, 7.1.4. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Is that where you were.  Okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I was talking about the new policy 
now that came into place. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Indeed.  I was particularly interested 
to know the criteria that was being applied in relation to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 283 of 318 
 
international bursaries where the policy which was signed 
off in 2016 did not exist and in answer to that you took us 
to the old policy. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The old policy, that was applicable 
in terms of identifying students. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    So just to make sure I understand 
what you are saying correctly, before the new policy came 
into place in 2016 the criteria that was used in relation to 
the awarding of international bursaries was exactly the 
same as that which is listed under clause 7.2 of the old 
10 
bursary. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    In relation to full time bursary 
holders excluding identified achievers. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Okay.  And the Chair highlighted that 
the income is certainly one of the considerations in 
considering the awarding of a bursary. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, you would see that 
the criteria, Chair, goes up to – that would be 7.  It would 
20 
not be  5, 6, 7.  V3 in terms of the Roman figures used, I 
mean it goes up to ix.  Roman figure ix. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair, if I may assist.  The 
question related to the criteria that was used before the 
international bursaries came into being. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 284 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   That will be found in page 18.  I 
think the witness is a bit unsure about – not unsure, as 
such, but that goes with the question as it was posed 
because in the affidavit it clearly states as to how before 
this international bursary scheme into operation what 
criteria was then used and that will be found on FS22.013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say 2.13? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Yes, 13, zero one three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Zero one three? 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   013 at 7.6, Chair.  It reads: 
“Student 
participating 
in 
international 
bursary 
programme were selected through a number of 
methods which included…” 
Because the question relates mainly to before the scheme 
that was adopted in 2016 came into effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, yes, I see that, ja. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Yes, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not think that is assisting in 
the sense in which you use that but let us leave it at that.  
20 
Mr Ralikontsane? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair, if I may say the question 
related to a period before …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I accept that, I do not know – 
I do not want to say why I am saying what I am saying, it is 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 285 of 318 
 
okay.  Mr Ralikontsane, you see – have you looked at 
paragraph 7.6? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chairperson, it is part of the 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What do you say about paragraph 
7.6 in relation to the answer you have given?  What do you 
say about paragraph 7.6? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Ja, I do indicate that the – we 
requested nominations from well-performing schools and 
requesting nomination from community doing outreach 
10 
programme and considering application from prospective 
students 
approaching 
the 
Free 
State 
Provincial 
Government directly.  We also distributed advertisements 
inviting prospective students to apply for international 
bursaries and both programmes were initially managed by 
the Department of Education, as I have indicated, and in 
accordance with the resolution by the executive council the 
management of both programmes were transferred to the 
Office of the Premier with effect from the 1 December 
2017.  17.6, Chair, if you may allow? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Whilst the indicate the recruitment 
process but the criteria would actually remain the same in 
terms of finally now identifying the students. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you give the criteria to the schools 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 286 of 318 
 
to say when you select use this criteria or did you apply 
the criteria yourselves and all you needed from the schools 
are well-performing candidates? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
We 
needed 
well-performing 
candidates from schools.  Those, the well-performing 
candidates, like the local bursaries, would not be subjected 
to a quantum of guardian’s income or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It will be like your top 100 in 
education where we do not determine quantum. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It is just top 100, we allocated 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the top performers. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Top performers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you fell within the category of top 
performers it was irrespective of whether you were indigent 
or not. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was granted a bursary. 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   You would be granted a bursary to 
study. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so – and then if you did not fall 
under that category then …[intervenes] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   You would be subjected to the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 287 of 318 
 
criteria. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Okay, Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Please clarify confusion that may be 
on my part insofar as you are referring to the top 
performers versus the application of the criteria.  But 
before we get there, 7.6 appears to be the process 
methodology in terms of which people would be – students 
would be selected.  Is that understood correctly? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    But it does not detract from your 
10 
earlier evidence and that is that the criteria that was used 
to select the individuals is the same as the fulltime bursary 
holders under the old policy. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Which applied to the awarding of 
local bursaries. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Which applied to the awarding of 
local bursaries. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Okay.  Now when you talk about the 
top 100 performers did that apply to international bursaries 
20 
as well because according to the policy it appears to only 
apply to the local bursaries. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No.  One can say we would identify, 
Chairperson, the top 100 from school and then they will 
then be subject because you do not – you would not get a 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 288 of 318 
 
number that would be equivalent to what a particular 
country or a particular university in a foreign country has 
agreed to.  So we would have to do assessment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Even if they are the top performers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, Ms September, just remember 
we do not have – to bother ourselves about the bursary or 
scholarship scheme unless there seems to have been 
something corrupt about it or the way in which it was run 
so – or connected with state capture. So we are not 
10 
interested in just seeing how they ran it unless this is what 
appears to be the case.  So that is what is important.   
Let me ask you this question.  Before there was a 
policy 
for 
granting 
scholarship 
of 
bursary 
student, 
international students or students who would study at 
international universities, what was the legal basis for 
granting bursaries or scholarships to students who study at 
international universities? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
We 
relied 
basically 
on 
the 
executive council resolution and obviously the discretion 
20 
that is there given to the accounting officer then who was 
in education …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but the executives council cannot – 
the executive council are not the law, they are not the law, 
is it not? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 289 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There needs to be a legal framework. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    To say this may be done, this may 
not be done.  The executive council itself must operate 
within the law. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Its own resolutions must fall within the 
law.  If there is no law allowing for something to be done, 
they cannot themselves.  It cannot be lawful because they 
10 
decide it should be done.  You understand that? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I am saying – maybe I should say 
we would, in particular, be looking at the Section 27 of the 
Public Service regulation.  It would actually empower the 
head of the department to take decisions consistent with 
the resolution of the executive council. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Ja, I think what I am looking for is 
this.  Looking at your affidavit it would appear that you – 
20 
there was a legal framework for the DG, the head – I think 
yourself, to grant bursaries, is that correct?  Or maybe 
each head of department? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Each head of the department and 
that is why it happened in education. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 290 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   In education, yes, yes.  At the time when 
it was – this scheme was based or located in the 
Department of Education, would the DG in the Premier ’s 
office have any power to grant any bursaries at all or only 
the head of department in the Department of Education. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, the head of Department in 
Education would responsible for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when it was moved ot the 
10 
office of the Premier then did the DG and the Premier ’s 
office have the power to grant these bursaries? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes.  Remember, the power has 
always been inherent in terms of Section 77 of the Public 
Service Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   But the resolution of the executive 
council these were centralised at education. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   None of heads of department were 
20 
allowed to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To grant bursaries. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   To grant bursaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, that is important.  Section 
77, did it grant the power to the DG in the Premier ’s 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 291 of 318 
 
office? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
At 
the 
time 
when 
I 
made 
allocations, Chair, it granted me that power. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When the bursary scheme placed or 
located in the Premier ’s office? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   In the Premier ’s office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And before that? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The head of the Department of 
Education also exercised that responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not the – was the source of that power, 
10 
say …[intervenes] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Inherent from the same… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got Section 77 here?  Did you 
refer to it? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I referred to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh no, there is the Public Service Act 
here.  Or was it in the other bundle? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Is Chair perhaps referring to 
Regulation 77? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it regulation or Section 77? 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Regulation 77 of the Public Service 
Act.  Regulation. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Regulation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I have got that.  Just read it if you 
have got it.  Or what did it say as you understood, as you 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 292 of 318 
 
remember it?  Regulation 77, what did it say? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
It 
empowers 
the 
head 
of 
department to allocate bursaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For each department? 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
For 
each 
department, 
for 
employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, in that department. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   And nonemployees.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so -and then the DG in the  
Premier ’s office, would he have had that power as well? 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The DG would have had that power 
inherent as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As well.  Okay, alright.  So each head of 
department had that power and the DG in the Premier ’s 
office also had that power. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes.  It was only through a 
resolution that it was agreed that this would be managed in 
education and at an appropriate time shifted to the office 
of the Premier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Now that regulation did it make any 
20 
distinction in terms of where the students would study that 
would be granted?  In other words, did it make a distinction 
between students who study locally in the country or within 
the province of the Free State or those who study outside 
of the country? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 293 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There was no distinction, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was no distinction. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There is no distinction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It said you can grant powers to I guess 
deserving students or those meet certain criteria. 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
Ja, 
to 
employees 
and 
nonemployees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nonemployees but they needed to be 
residents of the Free State. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   They needed to be residents of the 
10 
Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is what we brought into policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  So is the position 
therefore that before there was a policy relating to 
international bursaries, bursaries for students who studied 
outside of South Africa, there was no policy but Regulation 
77 was there, is that correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was always there. 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It was always there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say it was wide enough to 
enable the head of a department to grant a bursary. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To a student who is a resident of the 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 294 of 318 
 
Free State province without restricting as to where they 
would be studying. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair, but it was – we were 
very clear in terms of the 208 policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That it will be students in the Free 
State and in particular they will study at the universities of 
the Free State which I mentioned earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It was the general rule Free State 
universities but there could be exceptions. 
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There could be exceptions because 
top 100 students would have to go to any of the 
universities, maybe Free State would only offer a hundred 
and they would go anywhere else for study. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Is there anything useful 
that you find in Regulation 77? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    In fact the regulations are before us, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Regulation 77 that you referred to, 
20 
Mr Ralikontsane, is dated 2016.  So in fact it only applies 
as from 2016 as it would then apply in alignment with the 
second policy which you mentioned earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where do we find it first, let us find it 
first. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 295 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    No problem, Chair.  The 2016 – what 
we realised just before the hearing started with that, we 
did not have a full copy but it has since been placed on 
file, it just does not have – it is not properly paginated.  So 
apologies for that, Chair.  At page 53 – after 535 in the 
reference bundle Chair should find a copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just read it in the meantime. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    No problem, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that in terms of content?  Is there 
anything different from what he has told me? 
10 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Somewhat, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Paragraph 77 which is specific to 
training assistance and which falls under the chapter that 
deals with employment matters, informs: 
“That 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
enhancing 
the 
performance of the work of the department, a head 
of 
department 
may 
grant 
financial 
or 
other 
assistance for any study training or research where 
an employee …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where are you reading from?  Oh, this is 
not paginated. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Unfortunately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Public Service Regulations, then I must 
go to 77? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 296 of 318 
 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Yes, Chair, apologies for that, we 
just discovered it was not included in the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Training assistance? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    
For the purposes of enhancing the performance of 
the work of the department, a head of department 
may grant financial or other assistance for any 
study training or research where an employee 
undertakes the study, training, research on the 
10 
initiative of the department or the employee as 
requested.  Any such assistance for the study, 
training, research is related ot the employer ’s skills 
requirements, a head of department may grant 
financial or other assistance to employees for part-
time 
or 
fulltime 
activities 
at 
either 
local 
or 
international institutions.  The head of department 
may also grant assistance for studies in training 
through 
training 
interventions. 
 
A 
head 
of 
department may [indistinct] any reasons for extra 
20 
expenses [indistinct] treasury regulations.” 
Ja, okay, you were saying – you are putting to Mr 
Ralikontsane that this was promulgated in 2016? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Only from 2016, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
What 
do 
you 
say 
to 
that, 
Mr 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 297 of 318 
 
Ralikontsane? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, I wanted to see where 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where to find it. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Where to find that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Has he got the reference bundle?  
Have you not got a reference bundle for the witness? 
ADV 
SEPTEMBER: 
 
 
 
He 
does 
have 
a 
reference 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody must go and assist him if 
10 
…[intervenes] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Because in the 208 policy, already 
referring to that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   While they are looking there, Ms 
September, how much more time do you think you need? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    We have some to get through. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not propose to give you more 
than 15 minutes unless you really persuade me that I 
should… 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Well then let me start persuading 
20 
you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
first 
let 
us 
deal 
with 
the 
regulations thing but we – you see, as I was saying to you, 
we are looking at this bursary scheme simply in terms of 
the terms of reference of the Commission, whether it was 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 298 of 318 
 
being implemented for corrupt purposes, state capture 
purposes and so on.  So we are not looking at it just to see 
how they were implementing this, there is that purpose and 
I am – so when you ask, use the time that I am going to 
give you, that needs to be the focus.  Okay, but let us deal 
with the regulation.  Have you found it Mr Ralikontsane?   
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I found it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair I am unable to confirm 
whether this is an amendment because this Government 
10 
Gazette the 29 July, Public Service Regulation 2016, Chair 
I may not – I do not have at the moment information at my 
disposal to immediately ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Answer the question. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Answer the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
COUNSEL FOR MR RALIKONTSANE:   Thank you Chair, 
Chair in fact I was about to say I also share the Chair ’s 
sentiments in as far as my learned colleague started off by 
saying that there are allegations of an incriminating nature 
20 
and so far there has not been any. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
COUNSEL FOR MR RALIKONTSANE:   And the other 
problem is, if you look at the statements that were made by 
Mr Dukwana nowhere is Mr Ralikontsane implicated and 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 299 of 318 
 
also they start off by – it start off by saying that, in other 
words, Mr Dukwana has not laid a prima facie case against 
Mr Ralikontsane but started off by saying we suspected 
this, it was more speculative and hence the difficulty in 
trying to get a response from Mr Ralikontsane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, you see, the idea is that Mr 
Ralikontsane applied for leave to give evidence about the 
scheme.  So I have allowed him because Mr Dukwana gave 
evidence about the scheme, in part or mainly to get 
somebody within the provincial government to come and 
10 
give me a certain perspective about the scheme. 
Now, in doing that, my eyes are on whether there 
seems to be anything corrupt about it, or the way it was 
implemented.  So but first and foremost, it was to give him 
and the provincial government, the opportunity to explain 
the scheme because Mr Dukwana gave evidence about this 
bursary scheme in a certain way.  
So but I am just alerting Ms September that that 
must be the focus - I do not want us to spend too much 
time if that is not the focus, okay. 
20 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   I am happy to move on Chair, but the 
questions are really to understand, perhaps and – to 
understand the possible context within which Mr Dukwana 
gave evidence, and if I may, his evidence specifically talks 
to…[intervene] 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 300 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us start with Mr Dukwana. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know that the manner in which he gave 
his evidence was suggesting to say the least, that the 
bursary scheme was being used in a certain way.  I do not 
know whether he seemed also to be saying, service 
providers hope who got tenders would then be asked to 
contribute to the bursary scheme.  That is the - I think that 
is the context, you know.  So I do not know if you went 
beyond that but if that is the context, that is what we must 
10 
look at.  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   I am happy to just define it with 
reference to his affidavit in fact, if we turn to page 266, he 
informs at paragraph 110: 
“I suspect that this program is a way of taking 
money out of the country, under the guise that the 
government is paying for students to study abroad.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you see…[intervene] 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   He goes further…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see if it is just suspicion, that is 
20 
what counsel for Mr Ralikontsane was saying, you know, if 
it is just a suspicion.  So but you can ask questions aimed 
at clarifying what the position is whether or not there is 
anything that falls within our terms of reference with regard 
to it as a scheme or two to its implementation, how it was 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 301 of 318 
 
implemented. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Okay, in that case, let us move along 
to how this program was funded.  If we look at what you 
stated in your statement and your affidavit, maybe for the 
benefit of time you have informed that during 2019, a 
student who was awarded a local bursary cost R85 066,06.  
In 
2019 
an 
international 
student 
cost 
R202 
thousand…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hang on Ms September I would like 
your earlier question, as general as it was, before you go 
10 
into any specifics about specific students.  How was the 
bursary scheme or scholarship funded?  Was the money all 
coming from government or was the money coming from the 
private sector and individuals, how was it…[intervene] 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There was money appropriated 
Chair, for local and international bursaries 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, from governments? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   From government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, budgets. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   From governments budgets. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
Yes, 
so 
it 
was 
a 
clear 
appropriation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but was the money that was 
obtained from service providers or individuals outside of 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 302 of 318 
 
government that was used to also assist the students? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, I had this when evidence 
was led here about some of the officials who were working 
in Premiers office with regard to students that were being 
assisted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR 
RALIKONTSANE: 
 
 
But 
in 
our 
initial 
process, 
especially built up to 2010, we established what was called 
the Operation Hlasela Fund, this was registered as a non-
profit organisation.  This was basically to help students 
10 
that were not allocated bursaries and were indigent in the 
sense that they did not - the budget was confined to a 
particular number and then you would then have to assist 
other students for purposes of their accommodation where 
their parents now are unable to afford, the fitting at the 
university and so on.  
 
And in the process, we were cautioned that this -  
although this NPO is operating, it could cause some 
conflict with what program that we are running at that 
moment, 
which 
was 
a 
methodology 
of 
engaging 
our 
20 
community is called Operation Hlasela.  So that was 
basically what that that basically meant.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us try and get clarification. 
There was an official government bursary scheme, okay. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Appropriate.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 303 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the money used for that bursary 
scheme was in the budget of the provincial government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and once the scheme was shifted to 
the office of the Premier, you were the accounting officer in 
regard to that money as well? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   The budget was then also shifted to 
the office of the…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To your office, yes.  When the bursary 
scheme was located in the Department of Education, the 
10 
Head of Department at the Department of Education was 
the accounting officer in regard to that money as well? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   And the budget was appropriated to 
the Department of Education.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay, alright.  Now, you would 
have kept records, I would imagine, of all the students who 
you had granted bursaries under the government's official 
bursary scheme. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, how much was given to whom and 
20 
in which institution that student was studying. What the 
student was studying, and whether they were making good 
progress, you would have all of those reports I would 
imagine.  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 304 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now you have told me about 
Operation Hlasela and from what you have told me it 
appears that Operation Hlasela may have been meant to be 
a parallel bursary scheme.  Is that correct? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Not necessarily, it was meant to be 
an intervention to assist students, the needy students who 
may not have qualified for government bursary scheme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, when I say parallel bursary scheme, 
I mean it served the same papers as your official, 
provincial government bursary scheme, but to a category of 
10 
students who did not qualify under the official provincial 
governments scheme, is that correct?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and who – you said it was run by an 
NPO, is that right?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It was an NPO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and who was running the NPO? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It was an officials…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A government person? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It was officials of the Department of 
20 
Social Development, there were outsides. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It also had people from the banks 
as part of the NPO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright but was the NPO a 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 305 of 318 
 
government initiative? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, it was basically a government 
initiative. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A government initiative? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, and how was money raised that 
was used by the NPO to give bursaries to students? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   There were quite a number of 
people that were donating to the NPO in various ways, 
Chairperson and then the banks, some of these banks also 
10 
contributed, I think to the fund, in one or the other to 
assist some of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that NPO still in existence at the 
moment? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   It is dormant I would say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When did they stop operating?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I think in 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2018? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How long had it been operating by that 
20 
time? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   From 2010, it was called earlier on 
Friends of the Poor and then Operation Hlasela Fund, and 
then it was – it then became Friends of the Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 306 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why does it look like the moment the 
then Premier was no longer there it became dormant? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, I would say…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not the driving force behind it? 
COUNSEL FOR MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, I am sorry to 
interject.  Chair, the evidence that was led and I need to 
caution 
here 
between 
the 
use 
of 
the 
word 
as 
Mr 
Ralikontsane tried to explain earlier on, he used a word 
intervention 
rather 
than 
bursary, 
when 
it 
relates 
to 
10 
Operation Hlasela and the NPO.  And He further said, that 
scheme was designed to assist students that were already 
in studies, and their parents came short on many matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but hang on, he must give evidence 
not you. 
COUNSEL FOR MR RALIKONTSANE:   Correct, that is 
what he already said Chair so I was just cautioning about 
the understanding of the word bursary in relation to the 
NPO. He might try to confuse the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine you could re-
20 
examine him later on to clarify if necessary.  So I was just 
saying was the Premier the driving force behind it because 
now, it looks like when he was no longer the Premier, it 
died, 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Not necessarily Chair because we, 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 307 of 318 
 
in 2018, there was then a decision taken that we are going 
to reduce our budget and our allocation to student and that 
was even the time we now agreed that we will stop 
allocating international students. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I was talking about the NPO, 
not to the official provincial government bursary. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, I am saying maybe that is why 
it later on became dormant.  It might have been the issue 
that we were now in full control of almost everything that 
the provincial government was to fund. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am not sure if I have followed 
that. At a certain stage, you had the NPO which was 
running a bursary scheme for students who did not qualify 
under the official government, bursary scheme, is that 
right? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, the NPO was not basically 
only meant for bursaries it had other responsibilities of 
which the Board would decide upon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but one of them was thee bursary 
scheme?  
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and while that bursary scheme was 
being run by the NPO, the government was running its own 
bursary scheme as well. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yeah, I had that responsibility to 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 308 of 318 
 
run. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was operationally at the same time.  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I had the responsibility to run the 
government one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you say the NPO and its 
bursary scheme or the bursary scheme of the NPO came to 
an end in 2018, they stopped.  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yeah, they basically stopped 
engaging and I think there was a time where it became 
dormant and obviously it may have in one or the other 
10 
become deregistered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the awarding of bursaries by the 
NPO, did that happen separately from the government? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, it happened through the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Through the Board? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Through its to own Board.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well there was evidence given here, 
if I recall correctly, including evidence, I think given by 
Mss Cholota who was PA to the Premier then which 
suggested that or at least emails which suggested that 
20 
certain service providers or individuals were asked to 
provide funding for students, but at least some of those 
appear to have been asked to do that after getting some 
tenders, or some contracts, government contracts.  Do you 
know anything about that? 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 309 of 318 
 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, that part I heard when evidence 
led here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you do not know anything about it? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, as I say, we had a bursary 
scheme, and our intervention was through the NPO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but during the asbestos projects, 
were you the DG in the Premier's office?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I think part of that evidence 
related to the time of the asbestos project, and it related to 
10 
somebody who was a partner to the - one of the directors 
or partner, the one who passed on I think, I cannot 
remember his name.  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It related to that, and the emails were 
being exchanged between him or his office, and the office 
of the Premier and they have been directed to the PA to the 
Premier, and the PA to the Premier was sending emails, 
and I think when she gave evidence here, she said she was 
sending those emails, if I recall correctly, because the 
20 
Premier had asked her to do that, so you knew nothing 
about that?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, I have absolutely, I had 
absolutely no knowledge of that I read when I say evidence 
was led I was able to read the statements that were made 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 310 of 318 
 
here, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But to the extent that this may have 
happened for quite some time - I am wondering why 
somebody who is the DG in the Premier's office, would not 
have known about it, unless there was a deliberate 
intention to keep it away from him. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I do not know Chair whether this 
was 
kept 
away 
from 
me 
deliberately, 
I 
had 
heard…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know it is money.  
10 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yeah.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are the accounting officer. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yeah, but that had nothing to do 
with our bursary program.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Which I had a control of, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, I think the suggestion may 
have been made that the service providers were asked to 
direct the money straight to the students or to the 
universities, I am not sure without the money coming to the 
20 
office of the Premier, I think there may have been 
something along those lines. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   But that is basically that is why we 
would not - if the money was not with us, we would not be 
able to know about that, Chairperson. 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 311 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, Ms September. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you Chair, Mr Ralikontsane are 
you -  as the Chair has mentioned, these are third variants 
to this financial assistance concept.  On the one hand, you 
are talking about the official bursary scheme, on the other 
hand, you are talking about the NPO and then the third 
scheme as such is the one which was referred to by Ms 
Cholota and clearly differentiating that from the official 
one, when she says: 
“That she must draw a differentiation between the 
10 
bursary scheme run by and disseminated by the 
Free State Department of Education and financial 
assistance disseminated to students in need by the 
office of the Premier.” 
By virtue of the role that you played, having been involved 
in the Free State Province for several years, are you 
informing the Chair that you had absolutely no knowledge 
of this financial assistance program being run out of the 
office of the Premier?  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, Chair I would not say no, 
20 
because the – I wound not have been approached in any 
way by the needy students, I was running a bursary 
program and funding was a particular amount, Chair, and 
when that amount is exhausted, there is nothing that we 
are able to do anymore.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 312 of 318 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Okay, and then, if we – what we have 
done Chair that in the reference bundle, we have extracted 
all of the Appropriation Act relative from the period of 
2014, up until – 2014, 2015, 17, 19, and 2020.  We have 
consolidated that though, into a short document, by your 
leave my I hand it up? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but what is significant about it, what 
does it prove or what does it show? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   It informs Chair that there was, one 
10 
absolutely no funding in the office of the Premier up and 
until 2017, where there was very incremental increase, 
specifically allocated to bursaries and I would like the DG 
just to comment on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:    Chair, the evidence before us 
through the witness’s affidavit, talks, specifically to a 
bursary scheme and in doing so, it talks to the office of the 
Premier mentioned has also been made of the Department 
of 
Health, 
the 
Department 
of 
Agriculture, 
and 
the 
20 
Department of Education.  
It is in the context of that, that the Appropriation 
Acts were looked at to establish what the trends were in 
the allocation of funds to the provincial, to the Free State 
Provincial Government.  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 313 of 318 
 
The office of the Premier has not been allocated 
any funding until 2017 and so it is important to understand 
where exactly the funding came from, by virtue of the 
scheme that this witness had been managing before then.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe put the question first and let 
us see what the DG says because before we can look at 
the documents.  You heard what Ms September says? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   I have heard what she has been 
saying and that is correct because we were not running a 
bursary scheme until the function was transferred to us in 
10 
2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What were the years that you talked 
about? 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and then 
2019 and 2020, relative to the affidavits of the witness. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she is saying even 2019 there was 
not any allocation. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, there has been an allocation.  
CHAIRPERSON:   From 2018? 
20 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   From 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, but she mentioned 2017 and 2019. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   There has been an allocation from 
2017 and beyond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we do not want the ones where there 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 314 of 318 
 
was allocation.  So, he has got an answer for you, because 
he is saying there will be no allocation to the office of the 
Premier before 2017 because the bursary scheme had not 
been shifted to the office of the Premier, is that right? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Yes, all the funding was in 
education. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   And accordingly, we just wanted to 
get clarity as to where exactly the funding was coming from 
before 2017? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you looked at the Department of 
Education because she says that is where it was. 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Chair, we had allocated money to 
the Department of Health for the Cuban programs, for 
bursaries the Cuban programs that started in 2012. It was 
an international program run throughout all provinces.  So 
we had allocated money to them for that purpose.  We 
allocated money to the Department of Education to run the 
bursary program. 
Only beyond 2017, when some part of agricultural 
20 
students were sent to Belarus and Portugal was then 
agriculture given some funding to be able to specifically 
focus on agriculture students. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that is fine.  I want us to stop.  
What - how much time did you feel you wish to have?  
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 315 of 318 
 
Well, so far, there is very little, if anything that goes into 
what I am looking for, but the main thing was to give Mr 
Ralikontsane 
as 
the 
representative 
of 
the 
provincial 
government to come and explain how the bursary scheme 
happened.  
So if there is anything that the investigators or the 
legal team wants to investigate, let them investigate first 
and then let us look at it if necessary, Mr Ralikontsane can 
come back but it would have to be something quite weighty. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Chair, it is regrettable that we cannot 
10 
rely on the additional documents to that extent you only 
restricted now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you can still use them later if I allow 
it, so it is just that you got them late that is the - but those 
whatever questions arise from that, from them can be put 
to him, he can depose to you an affidavit and we can look 
at the affidavit and take it from there. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   May I just have a second quickly?  
Regrettably our hands are tied at this stage and we will 
have to explore what options there are in order to address 
20 
the additional documents but there is nothing further within 
the confines of what we can do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what we can do is also look at what 
you have, and then prepare a memo for me that indicates 
what you suggest you should – you would like to do in 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 316 of 318 
 
terms of taking whatever issues forward and if a request 
must be made to Mr Ralikontsane to put up an affidavit and 
answer certain questions that could be looked at as well.  
If necessary, he can be asked to come back, then I 
am sure he can come back but I would have just have to 
see because as I say the main purpose for granting his 
application was to give an opportunity to the provincial 
government of the Free State to explain the bursary 
scheme, which he has done in the affidavit here but to also 
put questions.  
10 
But what we are interested in is really to see 
whether the scheme was – if there was anything corrupt 
about it or whether it was implemented corruptly or in any 
illegal way that falls within our terms of reference, so you 
can work on that.  
But I think we can stop now.  If necessary we will 
take it further like that but it seems to me that when we 
have spent about two hours, and there is nothing that so 
far seems concrete, let us stop. 
ADV SEPTEMBER:   As it pleases Chair, within the 
20 
confines of what we can deal with we have no more 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I do not think that you would be 
needing to re-examine, or do you wish to? 
COUNSEL FOR MR RALIKONTSANE:   No, no we do not 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 317 of 318 
 
need to re-examine Chair with the evidence as is, thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, know that it is fine.  So you 
understand Mr Ralikontsane, you have been given a 
chance, you have explained what you have explained.  You 
have been asked questions, but you understand what the 
Commission is looking at in terms of State Capture and 
corruption and – but you may be asked, you might get a 
request to say, can you answer the following questions or 
can you explain the following?  
10 
There are some documents that Ms September 
wanted to use probably, though you might get questions or 
copies of some of the correspondence that she wanted to 
use, and you may be asked to give explanation or 
information by way of an affidavit, is that alright? 
MR RALIKONTSANE:   That is correct, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright and then if necessary you 
might come back but if not, you would just supply 
information under oath, okay.  
MR RALIKONTSANE:   Thank you, Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 Alright, 
thank 
you 
very 
much 
to 
everybody. Thank you, Ms September and your team.  
ADV SEPTEMBER:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you to the technicians and the 
staff. Thank you, Mr Ralikontsane and your counsel.  We 
06 MAY 2021 – DAY 390 
 
Page 318 of 318 
 
are now going to adjourn for the day, for the benefit of the 
public tomorrow the Commission will not be sitting but it 
will sit on Monday.   
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 10 MAY 2021 
