 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 344 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 83 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 3 of 83 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 15 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you will be – she is trying to get me 
one of the files but I think we – we can start.  We can start 
Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  This morning 
Mabusa Attorneys representing the former President Mr 
Zuma addressed a letter to the commission who informed 
10 
the commission that quote “as a matter of courtesy” 
unquote our client will not be appearing before the 
commission on 15 to 19 February 2021 for the reasons set 
out below. 
 
Two reasons are given.  The first is that there is a… 
CHAIRPERSON:  One sec – one second Mr Pretorius.    
Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Two reasons are given the first is 
as follows: 
“The commission is aware that the Review 
20 
Application 
which 
President 
Zuma 
has 
instituted to set aside the refusal by Deputy 
Chief Justice Zondo to recuse himself from 
hearing matters concerning him and his 
family is yet to be determined by the court” 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 4 of 83 
 
 
I just point out briefly at the moment perhaps there 
will be more to be said about it later Chair by yourself but 
for the moment that application was put before the 
Constitutional Court.  The Constitutional Court was aware 
of that application and notwithstanding that granted the 
order that it did compelling Mr Zuma to appear today. 
 
The second point raised is the following: 
“The summons issued for our client to 
appear on 15 to 19 February 2021 is 
irregular and not in line with the Fourth 
10 
Order of the Constitutional Court Judgment 
of 28 January 2021.” 
 
Well Chair that is not for Mr Zuma or his attorneys 
to decide that is a matter for the Constitutional Court and 
any contempt application it may emanate from these 
proceedings but it does seem to ignore the application or 
potential application of the principle that the issue of 
summons would be valid until set aside by a proper court 
and that is a principle applied our court time and time 
again. 
20 
 
And then in paragraph 5 the letter said: 
“Appearing 
before 
DCJ 
Zondo 
and 
the 
circumstances 
would 
undermine 
and 
invalidate the review application over his 
decision not to recuse himself.” 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 5 of 83 
 
 
Well no doubt the courts in due course will deal 
with that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do they – do they care to explain why if 
Mr Zuma thought that the fact that he intended to launch a 
review application against my decision not to recuse myself 
why they thought he should not put that before the 
Constitutional Court when the commission applied for an 
order to compel him to appear. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well they say in paragraph 6 that 
that review application was not before the Constitutional 
10 
Court.  It was not before the Constitutional Court in the 
sense the Constitutional Court was not asked to decide 
that application but certainly they are incorrect insofar as 
they suggest that that application was not properly pleaded 
and was not put before the Constitutional Court and they 
were aware of it.  So there is no explanation given beyond 
the bare statement.  But that is a matter that the 
Constitutional Court will no doubt decide on the face of it it 
has not merit whatsoever but what is not correct in the 
approach of the former President is that he should come 
20 
here and express a lawful reason why he should not apply 
the law or attend in accordance with the summons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Or set the summons aside prior to. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
When 
the 
commission 
– 
when 
the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 6 of 83 
 
commission launched an application – its application to the 
Constitutional Court Mr Zuma was served with a full set of 
papers 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And his attorneys were given a courtesy 
copious as far as I recall from what I was told to say here 
is a full set of court papers that will be or will – or have 
been served upon your client.   
 
Now in that application the point is made quite 
clearly that the commission was aware that Mr Zuma 
10 
intended to launch a review application in regard to the 
recusal application and it was contended by the Secretary 
of the Commission that that would be no grounds for him 
not to appear before the commission it the meantime. 
 
So he and his lawyers knew that this was one of the 
points that was being made – that were being made by the 
commission before the Constitutional Court.  And if they 
contested that it was up to them to file papers in the 
Constitutional Court and say the commission is wrong. The 
position is that as far as we are concerned if there is 
20 
review application we are still intending to file in the High 
Court the Constitutional Court should not order our client 
to appear.  Mr Zuma chose not to oppose that application 
notwithstanding the fact that he knew that that was one of 
the points that the commission was going to make before 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 7 of 83 
 
the Constitutional Court. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He – he and his lawyers sent a letter to 
say he would not participate in those proceedings at all.  
The question is can he complain about the order made by 
the Constitutional Court in circumstances where he was 
given a full opportunity to oppose that application and 
place before the court his case and elect and he elected 
not to do so. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. Chair the – we could use 
10 
much 
stronger 
language 
but 
perhaps 
that 
would 
be 
appropriate – more appropriate in time but the failure to 
appear today does not appear to be justified by any valid 
reasons certainly not the reasons given in the letter 
addressed to the commission as a matter of courtesy this 
morning. 
 
Firstly the review application matter was before the 
Constitutional Court. It was raised in pleadings before the 
Constitutional Court and notwithstanding the Constitutional 
Court’s awareness of it and notwithstanding Mr Zuma’s 
20 
failure to address the issues at all the order was given that 
he must appear. 
 
In relation to the summons not being a valid 
summons well that Mr Zuma was free to come here and say 
today but chose not to and as we know such a summons 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 8 of 83 
 
must as a matter of law be valid until set aside by a proper 
court.  People cannot just form their own views as to what 
the law might or might not say and decide what to do in the 
face of a validly issued summons or even a summons which 
on the face of it is validly issued. 
 
That is valid until set aside.  And there is not basis 
whatsoever 
for 
the 
certainly 
expressed 
day 
for 
the 
President not to be here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If Mr Zuma or his lawyers were of the 
view that the summons was irregular the law obliged him if 
10 
he wanted not to be obliged to appear to approach a court 
and ask that it be set aside on the basis that it was 
irregular. 
 
And I do not know the law to be that he is an adult 
to just ignore a summons just because he thinks it’s 
irregular. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think that the principle you have 
articulated is the same principle that the Constitutional 
Court told him about in the Nkandla matter.  That you 
20 
cannot just ignore a process issued by a lawful body 
requiring you to take certain action and just because you 
think it is wrong you just sit back and ignore it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  In any event Chair two points 
only to be made from what is or what appears to be in the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 9 of 83 
 
public domain the real reasons for non-appearance are not 
expressed in that letter and they are matters that are 
perhaps 
beyond 
the 
realm 
of 
this 
commission.   
 
This commission has a mandated job to do it must 
do 
it. 
 
The 
implications 
and 
consequences 
of 
this 
commission doing its job is for those who will receive the 
report ultimately to decide. 
 
The second point is that whatever merits there 
might be and we do not see any in the reasons not to 
appear today will no doubt in due course be decided by our 
10 
courts once again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got the media statement that 
he issued on the 1 s t of February?  Have you got it at hand? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we can get it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have not got it.  You see the letter 
from his attorneys this morning says in the last paragraph 
that in effect his non-appearance should not be constituted 
to suggest any defiance of the legal process.  But my 
recollection of his media statement of the 1 s t of February is 
that in his own words he said he was going to defy. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The summons of the commission and he 
was going to defy an order of the – the order of the 
Constitutional Court.  Those were his words.  The media 
statement was not issued by his foundation it appears to 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 10 of 83 
 
have been issued by him; himself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Chair in fact the statement it 
is a long statement but…hair in fact the statement it is a 
long statement but… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we could just place on record 
certain paragraphs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of his statement.  He says  
“I 
therefore 
state 
in 
advance 
that 
the 
10 
commission into allegations of state capture 
can expect no further cooperation from me 
in any of their process going forward.  If 
this stance is considered to be a violation 
of their law then let their law take its 
course.  I do not fear being arrested; I do 
not fear being convicted nor do I fear being 
incarcerated.” 
 
And then the last paragraph reads: 
“In the circumstances I am left with no other 
20 
alternative 
but 
to 
be 
defiant 
against 
injustice as I did against the apartheid 
government.  I am again prepared to go to 
prison to defend the constitutional rights 
that I personally fought for and to serve 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 11 of 83 
 
whatever sentence that this democratically 
elected government deems appropriate as 
part of the special and different laws for 
Zuma agenda” 
 
Well certainly... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is to put it at its mildness – 
mildest this statement of defiance. 
 
But once again Chair it does appear that the true 
reasons for not appearing are beyond these strict Terms of 
10 
Reference which we must investigate and they are of a 
political nature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we – we – the commission is 
interested in what reasons have been given insofar as they 
have been given for his non-appearance and that media 
statement seems to make it clear that he was – he had 
decided to defy. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The summons, to defy the order of the 
Constitutional Court and of course … 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The law. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – and the law and that seems 
consistent with his conduct before this commission on the 
19 t h of November when he had been issued with a 
summons; he came to the proceedings and left at a time 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 12 of 83 
 
when it had been made clear to him and his lawyers that to 
leave the commission without the Chairperson’s permission 
would be a breach of the summons and a breach of the 
commission. 
 
His foundation it is in the public domain issues a 
media statement on the same day saying it had been 
assured by him that he would have a good day than appear 
before the commission. 
 
So the media statement that he issued on the 1 s t of 
February after the Constitutional Court issued – have 
10 
handed down its judgment and ordered him to appear 
before the commission and to comply with all summonses 
and directives issued by the commission. 
 
The statement of – that he gave is consistent with 
the Jacob Zuma Foundation’s media statement of the 19 t h 
of November 2020. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in the founding affidavit deposed to 
by the Secretary of the Commission in the application that 
was made to the Constitutional Court one of the points was 
20 
not – that was made was that reference was made to the 
contents of that statement by the Jacob Zuma Foundation 
of saying he was going to – he was not prepared to appear 
before the commission and he would rather go to jail. 
 
And he that is Mr Zuma was invited to distance 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 13 of 83 
 
himself from that statement by his foundation; he has 
never distanced himself.  Instead in his media statement of 
the 1 s t of February he confirmed that he was going to defy 
not only the summons of the commission but also an order 
of the highest court in this country. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair in summary the reasons for 
non-appearance couched in courteous and polite language 
in this morning’s letter from Mabusa Attorneys do not seem 
to hold any water and are groundless.  But those comments 
there in particular the comment that nothing should be 
10 
construed goes to suggest any defiance of a legal process 
must be read in the light of the statements to which we 
have just referred. 
 
And 
in 
part 
– 
well 
particular 
concern 
is 
the 
reference to their law.  In other words not a law by which I 
will be bound but a law that will bind others and if there is 
any active defiance it is contained in those two words. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair the legal team has prepared 
an address to deal with the very circumstances that are – 
20 
have now arisen and if I could take half an hour or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To just inform the Chair and the 
public of the types of issues that would have been raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 14 of 83 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Had Mr Zuma elected to obey… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that is – that is important because 
it is important that everybody understands at least the 
important features of what has happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And how we have come to be where we 
are. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So what this address will deal with 
is really the evidence before the commission and what 
issues would have been placed before Mr Zuma for his 
10 
response or input in order to assist you to come to findings 
in accordance with your mandate and your Terms of 
Reference Chair. 
 
We do not intend to deal with the legalities of the 
non-appearance and the consequences of Mr Zuma’s 
failure to appear as a matter of law. 
 
In 
short 
Chair 
the 
commission 
has 
not 
been 
deprived of its opportunity to question the former President 
in regard to his knowledge of and his conduct relevant to 
the commission’s Terms of Reference which I will detail in 
20 
a moment. 
 
But by way of summary where we find ourselves 
now is that we have Terms Of Reference a mandate to you 
Chair and to the commission as a whole Mr Zuma has is 
referred to directly by name in four Terms of Reference and 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 15 of 83 
 
indirectly in two as part of the Executive or at least two. 
 
His 
evidence 
is 
obviously 
relevant 
to 
the 
commission’s work in this regard.   There can be no doubt 
about that.   
 
Mr Zuma has also been implicated to date by the 
evidence of at least 40 witnesses now.  Now whether Mr 
Zuma believes he has been accused of wrongdoing or not 
which appears to be the case his responses to those 
allegations are still directly relevant to the work of this 
commission. 
10 
 
Numerous statements have been made by or on 
behalf of Mr Zuma that he has not been implicated in any 
wrongdoing by any of the witnesses that have thus far 
come before you Chair.   
 
If that is so – if it is so that Mr Zuma believes he 
has not been implicated of any wrongdoing or accused of 
any wrongdoing by any evidence before you Chair then it is 
difficult to understand why he would need to rely on a right 
to silence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And also it is difficult to understand why 
20 
he would be scared of taking the witness stand and 
subjecting himself to questioning like everybody else. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
By 
the 
evidence 
leaders 
and 
the 
Chairperson. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 16 of 83 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And still less Chair would Mr Zuma 
need to rely on any right against self-incrimination if on his 
version there is no evidence which indeed incriminates.  So 
the alleged interference with his constitutional rights 
seems on his own version to be entirely groundless.   
 
Be that as it may what happened during the 
Presidency of Mr Zuma and during the period under review 
the details of what he did; the details of what he did not do 
and importantly his knowledge of the relevant events 
whether 
direct 
knowledge 
or 
indirect 
knowledge 
are 
10 
important for the work of this commission. 
 
Moreover he was not only during much of the period 
under review not necessarily all of the period under review 
President he was 
Chair of Cabinet.  Cabinet made 
important – Cabinet on the face of it failed to take 
importance of this issue. 
 
The 
exercise 
of 
his 
responsibility 
in 
these 
capacities are important to the work of the commission. 
 
Finally Mr Zuma and members of his family are 
alleged to have received substantial monetary and other 
20 
benefits from private and state sources.  These also 
require a response and an explanation. 
 
In short Chair Mr Zuma perhaps more than anyone 
else is able to assist the commission in understanding what 
happened in the period under review; how it happened and 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 17 of 83 
 
what recommendations the commission could make in 
relation to its findings. 
 
But clearly this is assistance is not forthcoming.  
This is not attack it is a calling to account and a calling for 
assistance and information to enable you Chair to – to fulfil 
your mandate. 
 
The 
Constitutional 
Court 
made 
a 
finding 
in 
December Chair said or January. 
“It 
must 
be 
plainly 
stated 
that 
the 
allegations investigated by the commission 
10 
are extremely serious.  If established they 
would 
constitute 
a 
huge 
threat 
to 
our 
nascent and fledgling democracy.  It is in 
the interests of all South Africans the 
respondent included that is Mr Zuma that 
these allegations are put to rest once and 
all.  It is only the commission which may 
determine if there is any credence in them 
or to clear the names of those implicated 
from culpability.” 
20 
There are two aspects to a commission of inquiry 
certainly in these circumstances Chair. 
The first is to investigate its Terms of Reference.  
To hear evidence in relation to its Terms of Reference and 
to make findings and recommendations in relation to that. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 18 of 83 
 
But t is also there – there as a matter of public 
concern and this was stressed by the Constitutional Court.  
The public have a right to know what happened.  The 
public have a right to know what their President did or did 
not do.  The public have a right to know what their 
President says about this.  Not in the streets outside 
residences in KwaZulu Natal but here in this commission. 
So the duty to assist the commission there is not 
only a legal duty arising from the summons issued by the 
commission but the narrow legal issue which is before you 
10 
Chair.  It is a cross.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in – in talking about the duty to 
assist if I recall correctly paragraph 3 of the Terms of 
Reference of the commission which were signed by him 
while he was President in paragraph 3 of the Terms of 
Reference he said all organs of state will be required to 
cooperate fully with the commission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One would have thought that he would be 
the first one to cooperate fully with the commission. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well at the time too he made 
a public statement announcing the establishment of the 
commission and urging all South Africans to cooperate fully 
and that clip is in the media. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 19 of 83 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Apart from the duty to obey the 
summons; apart from the duty to abide by regulations, 
Terms of Reference and the like there is a constitutional 
duty there arising from the position that Mr Zuma held as 
President of the country. 
 
It is also a public duty owed to the citizens of this 
country.  Manifestly this commission’s work is a matter of 
public concern. 
 
So Chair whatever the politicians and commentators 
might have to say about the commission’s work it remains 
10 
our duty to fulfil the mandate that you have given in 
accordance with your Terms of Reference and it is these 
Terms of Reference that guide its work.  We simply have to 
do our duty so whatever the noise out there Chair we – 
yourself as the sitting Justice and ourselves as evidence 
leaders and the investigators we have a mandate it is a 
legal mandate and we must obey that mandate and that is 
our duty – then we must fulfil it. 
 
The legal consequences of Mr Zuma’s failure to 
appear will no doubt be dealt with separately and perhaps 
20 
Chair we can – you will deal with those in due course. 
 
But 
I 
would 
appreciate 
Chair 
and 
have 
been 
requested by yourself to inform yourself the commission 
and the public of the issues the legal team intended this 
week and perhaps an additional time to raise with Mr 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 20 of 83 
 
Zuma. 
 
Chair there is a need for a caveat however it seems 
that many do not understand really how the commission 
goes about this.  But here is evidence.  It does not tell 
people what to say of – it may highlight topics that need to 
be covered but ultimately the witnesses come here to give 
their evidence. 
 
That evidence can be contested by other witnesses 
in the fullness of time and when you do your report Chair 
you will decide who is telling the truth and who is not 
10 
telling the truth and we can assist you in that regard. 
 
But the allegations that we will outline now in this 
address Chair are based on evidence presented as well as 
evidence still to be presented; allegations which have 
emerged and investigations, statements which have been 
taken. 
 
The correctness or the veracity of that evidence will 
only finally get examined after you Chair have considered 
all the relevant versions received in respect of the 
evidence including what we thought might be the version of 
20 
Mr Zuma. 
 
Some of the allegations as I have said that will be 
referred to have not yet been led in evidence but Mr Zuma 
has been notified of such allegations in voluminous 
correspondence and his attorneys.  All those allegations 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 21 of 83 
 
would in the ordinary course be the subject matter of 
notification to Mr Zuma before being questioned thereon at 
a later state. 
 
So even if this week we were constrained to deal 
with certain issues in relation to which Mr Zuma had 
already been received information and be notified. 
 
In later – at a later time, he would have to answer 
other questions or be asked to answer other questions in 
relation to allegations that are the subject matter of the 
Commission’s investigations. 
10 
 
Chair, but the essential thrust of the questioning 
and discussions with Mr Zuma this week is based on the 
ultimate question really that the Legal Team would like to 
assist this Commission to answer. 
 
In August 2018, the Legal Team made an opening 
presentation to the Commission and in that opening 
presentation it was emphasised that State Capture is not 
just about corruption. 
 
The mandate to enquire as to what is State 
Capture and whether State Capture was a project which 
20 
was perpetrated by whomever might have been implicated 
in the evidence.  It is a question that is yet to be 
answered. 
 
The work of this Commission is not even about 
widespread corruption.  Corruption itself may be a part of a 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 22 of 83 
 
project of State Capture or an alleged project of State 
Capture but it is - State Capture is more than that. 
 
State 
Capture, 
and 
this 
was 
in 
the 
opening 
statement in 2018, at least in theory would concern a 
network of relationship both inside and outside government 
whose objective would be to ensure the repurposing of 
government departments, officials and state-owned entities 
for private and unlawful... 
 
In other words, when one puts together all the 
elements, the evidence that you have heard, the question 
10 
is:  What does this mean?  Is it just corruption?   
 
Are these just ad-hoc events that seem to collect 
in a period of time or is there something more to it than 
that.  And that is what would have been explored with 
Mr Zuma and that is ultimately a finding that you would 
have to address in your report Chair. 
 
So the submission was made that the work in 2018 
Chair by the Legal Team that the Commission was obliged 
to investigate circumstances where the allocation and the 
distribution of state resources is firstly determined by a 
20 
network of persons outside and inside government acting 
contrary to constitutional and legal norms. 
 
Secondly, directed not in terms of our laws and 
policies to what should have been the outcome but for the 
promotion, 
protection 
and 
private 
financial 
gain 
of 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 23 of 83 
 
beneficiaries of that network of that business inside and 
outside government. 
 
And facilitated that project, the question arises:  
Was that project – and this was put as a question, not as 
an answer – was it facilitated by deliberate effort to exploit 
or 
weaken 
key-state 
institutions 
for 
example 
law 
enforcement agencies or even Parliament in its oversight 
duties? 
 
Finally Chair, what would have been at its borders, 
the question, not the answer, the question put to Mr Zuma 
10 
is how does one make sense of it?  What really happened?  
Not the little pieces of the jigsaw but looked at globally in 
its whole conspectus.  What happened? 
 
And secondly, how could that have happened?  
How could it happen for example that this corruption was 
not picked up and prevented by law enforcement agencies? 
 
How could it happen that the various constitutional 
oversight bodies failed, at least initially, to deal with what 
was going on?  Really what happened and how could it 
have happened? 
20 
 
And only with the full understanding of that with 
the assistance of Mr Zuma, honestly and openly speaking 
to the Commission, could one take the next step towards 
recommendations. 
 
To go into some detail now Chair against that 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 24 of 83 
 
general background.  Mr Zuma would have been asked to 
respond in detail to allegations regarding his relationship 
with the Gupta family in South Africa. 
 
And there are many factual issues which arise 
under this head that would require some discussion and 
some examination. 
 
So, and obviously, in the short time that we have 
this morning I am not going to deal with every issue but 
mainly to highlight certain important issues. 
 
There has been evidence led over three years 
10 
Chair relating to the knowledge and involvement of the 
Gupta 
family 
in 
actual 
or 
contemplated 
ministerial 
appointments and dismissals. 
 
We 
have 
heard 
the 
evidence 
of 
Ms 
Mentor, 
Mr Jonas, Ms Hogan, Mr Gigaba, Mr Mbalula, Mr Gordhan, 
Mr Nene and Mr Des van Rooyen to name but a few.  All of 
them ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You said Mr Gigaba.  Well, I have not 
heard him yet. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, there are allegations 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there is evidence ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...that have been put to him. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 25 of 83 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...media allegations. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There are allegations that he would 
answer in this realm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As I said in the beginning this 
includes evidence already led and to be led on the 
understanding that before been called to answer, he would 
have been informed of it for a later appearance. 
10 
 
Chair, 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
appointments 
and 
dismissals of ministers; now this is just one piece of the 
jigsaw, what flowed from the appointments and dismissals 
of ministers, I will deal with in due course but that is the 
starting point in the centre of the jigsaw puzzle Chair. 
 
The evidence has been that the Gupta’s had in 
some cases prior knowledge of executive appointments and 
dismissals in our Terms of Reference specifically... 
 
The 
Gupta 
sought 
to 
influence 
executive 
appointments on occasion through bribery or attempted 
20 
bribery.  The Gupta sought to gain business advantage 
from relationship with and access to ministers and I will 
come to the detail in a moment.  That is at a general level. 
 
What is also clear, and that is the next step in the 
puzzle, the Gupta’s and Gupta related entities ultimately 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 26 of 83 
 
benefited substantially from manifestly corrupt or irregular 
procurement deals.  That is the evidence.  Those are the 
allegations made before you.  You will make a finding on 
the correctness of those allegations and in due course. 
 
And this followed what may be termed a new level 
of repurposing, not at executive level but at the level state-
owned entities. 
 
And the allegation that would have been put to 
Mr Zuma is that by reorganising or repurposing state-
owned entities, principle who appointments and dismissals 
10 
in relation to which, at least in some cases, Mr Zuma’s 
involvement was direct. 
 
That as arranged to redirect state resources into 
hands of select individuals and entities including Gupta 
entities.  And these beneficiaries included members of 
Mr Zuma’s family.  So the allegation goes and I stress this, 
the allegations.  Principle Mr Duduzane Zuma. 
 
So Chair there is substantial evidence requiring an 
answer before you make your final decision and I stress 
that once again that we are dealing here with allegations 
20 
that are before this Commission that must be dealt with in 
the fullness of time. 
 
Mr Zuma involved himself ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, strictly speaking, where evidence 
has already been given, it is really more than allegations.  
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 27 of 83 
 
It is evidence.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is evidence now.  It has been given 
under oath and some of those witnesses have subjected 
themselves to questioning on their evidence.  So it is 
evidence that has been placed before the Commission.  It 
is no longer just mere allegations that are made in the 
streets. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Well, perhaps it would be fair 
to say that in the course of evidence under oath before 
10 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It has been tested to an extent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Certain allegations have been 
made which require an answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At the end of the Commission’s 
work insofar as the leading of evidence is concerned, 
whether in oral or documentary form, you will then 
20 
determine the outcome Chair. 
 
So there is substantial evidence.  Chair, I will 
detail that in a moment.  That Mr Zuma’s involvement 
directly in the affairs of state-owned entities.   
 
Executive 
appointments 
were 
follows 
and 
the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 28 of 83 
 
executive – I am talking of Cabinet appointments – were 
followed by appointments of amongst others board of and 
senior 
executives 
in 
state-owned 
entities 
and 
this 
happened by way of example, Eskom, Transnet, Denel, 
PRASA, SAA.  All that evidence is before you Chair. 
 
The consequence.  What happened then in time is 
that there has been evidence of vast acts of corruption 
which took massive resources out of those state entities 
and placed them in the hands of those very entities and 
persons who influenced this whole process... 
10 
 
The question is:  Was this just a coincidence in 
time?  Is it simply a coincidence in time that after the 
ministerial 
appointments 
of 
ministers 
and 
after 
the 
replacement of boards and replacement of executive vast 
corruption is alleged to have taken place. 
 
Is that a coincidence or was it part – was the 
outcome 
intended 
at 
the 
time 
the 
reorganisation 
or 
repurposing took place?  That is the key question in 
relation to whether State Capture took place or not Chair. 
 
So for example.  Chair, if we may ...[indistinct] 
20 
[mechanical interruption in recording 00:12:08 – 00.12.38] 
 
...as 
the 
allegation 
was 
in 
who 
should 
be 
appointed, whether Mr Marogo’s(?) resignation should be – 
have been accepted and for what purpose?  Why was this 
done?   
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 29 of 83 
 
 
There has also been evidence Chair, substantial 
evidence more recently, that during the latter years, much 
later than the incidents revolving around Mr Marogo’s 
resignation, that the former President involved himself 
directly in the suspension of senior Eskom executives and 
their ultimate replacements by others. 
 
That 
evidence, 
you 
have 
asked 
Mr Zuma 
to 
respond to in 10.6 Directives which are legally binding.  
Those 10.6 Directives asking him to respond to that 
evidence have been completely ignored. 
10 
 
Once again, why would a sitting President – this 
would be put before Mr Zuma – involve himself in meetings 
with executives and others to determine the content of a 
board, or senior executives in this case, of a state-owned 
entity?  What was the purpose of that? 
 
We know what happened afterwards, after the 
repurposing under Mr Zuma’s watch as that corruption 
occurred, redirection of state resources occurred.  The 
question is:  Was there a link?  Was the outcome intended 
by 
the 
repurposing 
or 
through 
the 
repurposing 
and 
20 
reorganisation? 
 
So evidence has also been led.  One will recall at 
the beginning the influence or alleged influence of the 
Gupta family in ministerial appointments and dismissals 
and others too. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 30 of 83 
 
 
We know that ultimately financial benefits in a 
reorganised state-owned entity flowed to the Gupta’s and 
Gupta related entities.  Again, was this just coincidence 
entirely or was it this a planned series of acts to achieve 
the outcome that actually happened?  And in this, Mr Zuma 
could have assisted you in answering that question. 
 
We also have evidence Chair of cash during this 
period under review in giving to and taken away from the 
Saxonwold residence of the Gupta’s by a number of key-
personnel in the state-owned entity stable or stables. 
10 
 
Now if one takes these events, the attempts to 
influence executive appointments, the attempt to – and I 
mean Cabinet executives at Cabinet level, appointments 
and dismissals, the consequent effect that those – that 
reorganisation at the highest level had on the composition 
of boards and executives in state-owned entities. 
 
The outcome of that, the allegation of the elicit 
flow of monies out of these state-owned entities to the very 
influencers that sought in the beginning to set the train of 
events in motion. 
20 
 
The question is:  Are these random and ad-hoc 
occurrences in a sequence of time?  Or are they part of an 
organised project to redirect state resources into private 
and individual hands where these are elicit and receipts? 
 
Transnet, 
Chair 
is 
another 
example. 
 
Again, 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 31 of 83 
 
Mr Zuma appears to have involved himself directly in 
executive appointments.   
 
Mr Hogan led extensive evidence, some of which 
had been dealt with but not entirely by Mr Zuma of 
Mr Zuma’s actions in the contemplated appointment of 
Mr Siyabonga Gama.   
 
According to the evidence, Mr Zuma went to great 
lengths to bring this about despite what was happening at 
the hands of the board within Transnet. 
 
The appointment of Mr Brian Molefe as Transnet 
10 
Group CEO appears to be known beforehand by the New 
Age Newspaper, a Gupta entity.  Now could this happen?  
What are the implications of this evidence?  Was there an 
organising hand in this whole sequence of events? 
 
Again Chair, there is substantial evidence of a 
repurposed 
Transnet 
being 
exploited 
through 
corrupt 
procurement deals for personal gains, including that of the 
Gupta related entities.   
 
Denel, by way of example Chair, there is evidence 
that through appointments and dismissals at board and 
20 
executive level, Denel was reorganised under the Minister 
at the time, Minister Lynne Brown. 
 
And that includes the appointment of Mr Dan 
Mantsha, Mr Zuma’s former attorney as chair of the Denel 
Board.  Did Mr Zuma have any hand or know of it?  What 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 32 of 83 
 
was 
the 
position 
there? 
 
But 
again, 
after 
the 
reorganisation, after the change in personnel one has – is 
it a mere coincidence entirely?   
 
You have the VR Laser matter where at great cost 
to state-owned entity, Denel, a Gupta related entity, VR 
Laser Asia is dealt with by Denel.  They cost Denel but 
great benefit to the related entity.   
 
Again, is this merely a coincidence entirely or was 
it part of an intended plan and then was it an intended 
consequence?  Because now the evidence is building up 
10 
Chair.  You have Transnet, you have Denel.   
 
At PRASA the same pattern occurs. Evidence of 
appointments of the chair and CEO under whose watch 
significant acts of corruption have been alleged and 
reported. 
 
There is also been evidence of attempts to “clean-
up PRASA” being hampered by a lack of support from the 
ANC Top Six that including Mr Zuma.  And that is an 
explanation required, not only from Mr Zuma but from 
others as well who were part of the Top Six at the time. 
20 
 
It is not enough to say:  Well, they had the power 
to deal with it.  They should have dealt with it.  I mean, 
that is the most extraordinary statement that emerged from 
that evidence by a senior ANC politician who simply said:  
Yes, we were told of the corruption by Mr Molefe but they 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 33 of 83 
 
had the power to deal with it.  It is really extraordinary. 
 
And then there has been evidence of a company 
and this company would – is part of the evidence, quite 
separate from evidence that was sought to be led in 
relation to benefits that a company is linked to Mr Zuma or 
a company linked to someone who paid Mr Zuma money, 
received benefits under the PRASA banner but that is 
another issues that would have been raised. 
 
But again, there is evidence that payments were 
made to Mr Zuma arising out of the procurement deal in the 
10 
PRASA stable. 
 
SAA, 
similar 
evidence, 
South African Airways 
particularly the protection that has alleged to have been 
afford to Ms Dudu Myeni as chair of SAA who we know had 
a very close relationship with Mr Zuma.  And these 
allegations would have been put to him and he would have 
been asked for an explanation in this regard. 
 
Now Chair these examples in relation to state-
owned entities are by no means exhausted of the evidence 
led before the Commission but as I have said what requires 
20 
consideration, ultimately by you Chair after evidence from 
all concerns is, what is the connection between the 
attempts to influence appointments and dismissals by 
Cabinet. 
 
The appointments and dismissals that actually took 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 34 of 83 
 
place at Cabinet ministerial level.  The appointments and 
dismissals that took place at state-owned entity, board and 
executive levels and the substantial corrupt dealings, 
evidence of substantial corrupt dealings which followed. 
 
The question that would have been put to Mr Zuma 
is:  What was your involvement, your knowledge, your 
action, your lack of action in relation to this?   
 
Was this just, as I have said, a coincidence, a 
sequence 
of 
coincidental 
actions 
which 
began 
with 
attempts to influence appointments at the most senior 
10 
government level through to board executives and – well, 
board and executives of state-owned entities by corruption 
to the benefits that came back to those that sought to 
influence this course of events in the first place? 
 
Was that an organised project?  Was the outcome 
intended when these appointments and dismissals were 
made?  Were the persons who were appointed subject to 
influence that could have assisted in the redirection of 
state resources in a manner in which it was done? 
 
That 
is 
as 
far 
as 
state-owned 
entities 
are 
20 
concerned. 
 As 
far 
as 
government 
departments 
are 
concerned, similar evidence, similar pattern of evidence 
has been put before you Chair. 
 
There has been substantial evidence of attempts to 
reorganise or repurpose government departments.  Again, 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 35 of 83 
 
the evidence appears to state that this was done for the 
improper business advantage of select individuals and 
entities. 
 
Now that is put at the most general level.  Some of 
the detail in Minerals and Energy you heard evidence Chair 
from former Minister Ramatlhodi that he was pressured to 
meet with and to favour Gupta linked operations.  Again 
improperly within the mining sphere Chair. 
 
The allegations are to the effect that reports were 
made to Mr Zuma in relation to these offences.  Did he 
10 
approve?  Did he act?  Did he fail to act?  In each case, 
why?  What was the purpose of that approach? 
 
These attempts were resisted by Mr Ramathlodi.  
He was removed as Minister.  Mr Zwane was then 
appointed as Minister.  Attempts were made to appoint 
Mr Jimmy Manje as Director-General.  These attempts 
failed.   
 
But these figures appear in other aspects of the 
evidence too, particularly in relation to communications 
and government Communications And Information Service, 
20 
the New Age Newspaper and the like.  I will deal with that 
in a moment.   
 
So 
after 
Mr 
Zwane’s 
appointment, 
there 
is 
evidence that steps were taken to favour the Gupta’s 
mining interests.  Some of those activities the evidence 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 36 of 83 
 
appears were irregular and unlawful.   
 
There is the remarkable evidence of one of the 
former members of the SAA to the effect that – to the 
knowledge of the President.   
 
A meeting was held in the President’s private study 
in his residence in Pretoria where one of the Gupta 
brothers accosted Ms Susan Shabangu about her failure to 
meet the desires of the Gupta family and its entities in 
relation to the mining issue.   
 
That evidence is quite extensive but again shows 
10 
that to the knowledge of the pressure, the pressure was 
put for elicit and unlawful favoured treatment within the 
Minerals and Energy Department. 
 
National Treasury, the matter of great controversy 
especially beyond the four walls of this venue Chair.  But 
as was made clear by Mr Nene.   
 
National Treasury – it is important because its 
finances deal, procurement deal of a large nature, it does 
have a supervisory procurement role to play and it is in a 
sense an oversight body in this regard.  It does have 
20 
regulatory powers over how it governs financial resources. 
 
So Treasury is, and the evidence is that it was, a 
stumbling block to irregular procurement deals and the 
irregular expenditure of state resources. 
 
And 
what 
is 
clear 
is 
that 
again 
the 
former 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 37 of 83 
 
President, the evidence goes, sought to influence or exert 
pressure on Treasury officials.  Ultimately removed two 
ministers and the evidence goes, stood in the way of a 
deal involving Petro SA where it wish to buy Engen 
Refinery.   
 
Or it did not wish to, the pressure came from 
above that a deal should be done at great cost without due 
diligence exercised for an overpriced Engen refinery from 
the Malaysian owner of the furnace. 
 
That evidence would have been explored.  The 
10 
New 
Clear 
deal 
and 
the 
activities 
in 
Russia 
where 
Minister Nene was involved and gave evidence as to, 
pressure put on him.  What happened at Cabinet?   
 
Why was this deal contemplated in the first place 
without sufficient background information?  Why would the 
information only be investigated after an in principle 
decision was made in Cabinet? 
 
This is something that not only Mr Zuma would 
have to answer to but other members of Cabinet as well 
and it will in due course be done Chair.  Mr Zuma is not the 
20 
only one who was part of such decisions. 
 
Chair, that is a matter that could have cost the 
country dearly as we have heard.  Why?  The request by 
the chair of the SAA Board, Ms Dudu Myeni to open a new 
SAA route.  Again, direct involvement in placing pressure 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 38 of 83 
 
there.  There are other examples Chair.   
 
The closure of the bank accounts is another area 
where private banks took steps to close Gupta and Gupta 
related entities’ bank accounts and there was a ministerial 
task team appointed. 
 
In essence, the evidence goes to propose and to 
prevent that outcome and there has been substantial 
evidence in relation to that.   
 
The interestingly and significantly there was – there 
were at least two incidents of centralisation of power 
10 
under the Presidency and under the State Security Agency 
and I will come to the latter point in due course.  But there 
has been evidence that Mr Zuma initiated a process to 
remove the National Budget process from Treasury and to 
place in the hands of the President and the reasons for this 
require some investigation and explanation. 
 
Chair, the removal of Mr Nene as Minister of Finance 
by Mr Zuma has been dealt with in evidence.  That took 
place in December 2015 and that took place at the time 
when according to the evidence Mr Nene stood in 
20 
opposition to the new [indistinct – dropping voice] 00.53.  
Was there a relationship?  That question needs to be put and 
needs to be answered. 
 
The stated reason that Mr Nene’s deployment was 
required to the BRICS Bank as being seriously questioned in 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 39 of 83 
 
evidence by more than one witness.  That simply was an 
unconvincing and some say spurious reason.  There were 
other reasons.  What were those reasons?  And were they 
part of this overall plan that emerges or possibly emerges 
from all the evidence?   
 
It also appears that the Guptas had full knowledge of 
Mr Nene’s removal and there was an alleged complaint on 
their part that Mr Nene would not “work with them.”  That 
evidence before you, Chair, needs explanation and answers. 
And it was shortly before Mr Nene’s removal that 
10 
according to Mr Jonas there was an attempt to bribe him to 
take up the role of Minister of Finance, again that evidence 
is before you and that evidence needs to be dealt with. 
These are the friends, close friends of Mr Gupta, 
close friends with Mr Zuma and his son and others in the 
family, particularly Mr Duduzane Zuma.  What was going on 
here?  What are the links, what was the purpose behind all 
these 
appointments 
and 
dismissals 
and 
were 
they 
to 
facilitate the outcome that we know actually happened? 
 
Then there are the circumstances surrounding Mr 
20 
Gordhan’s removal by Mr Zuma, his sudden recall from 
London.  There has been that evidence.  Those too require 
clarification.   
Where did the supposed State Security document 
Operation Checkmate come from?  What was its status?  
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 40 of 83 
 
We know the evidence is that that document was put before 
the top six but its contents were rejected and then other 
reasons were stated but what was – why was this done? 
Why was it necessary to change the incumbent of the 
ministry there?  The outcome and consequences, were they 
intended? 
So the access to and use of a supposed intelligence 
document in an apparent attempt to justify Mr Gordhan’s 
dismissal requires some explanation or clarification.  We 
know that Mr Zuma then sought to replace Mr Gordhan with 
10 
Mr Brian Molefe and we know that he had had a recent and 
eventful journey through Eskom and Transnet with all that 
happened during that time. 
We know that the top six objectives probably and that 
Mr Gigaba was appointed instead but those questions need 
to be explored. 
 
Again to answer the question as to whether these are 
all coincidental, these individual pieces of evidence which 
ultimately pile up and appear to point in one direction.  Is 
that a fair conclusion?  Was the outcome intended? 
20 
 
The appointment of Mr Gigiba’s deputy, Mr Buthelezi, 
is another one issue that requires some investigation 
particularly 
as 
Mr 
Buthelezi 
had 
been 
implicated 
in 
allegations of serious malfeasance at PRASA and Mr Zuma 
was aware of it. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 41 of 83 
 
 
South African Revenue Services, another example, 
Chair.  We know that there is evidence, perhaps to come, of 
Mr Zuma’s direct relationship with Bain Incorporated and the 
firm of Mr Moyane as the SARS head and the involvement of 
Bain and Company and the supposed restructuring of SARS 
is well-documented in the Nugent report as having a 
disastrous outcome.  But why, you know, Mr Zuma, did you 
have any personal involvement?  What was the object of 
your personal involvement in your dealings with Bain and 
with Mr Moyane?  The outcome, was that an intended 
10 
outcome?   
We 
know, 
for 
example, 
that 
the 
Gupta 
family 
benefited 
from 
dubious 
decisions 
at 
SARS 
regarding 
controversial tax treatment.  But that is just one of the 
outcomes. 
 
The 
Waterkloof 
landing, 
Chair, 
that 
is 
another 
question. 
 
When all the evidence before you is considered and 
all the evidence that was not forthcoming before you is 
considered, the probabilities will have to be considered by 
20 
you and this is a direct issue that needed to be raised with 
Mr Zuma.  The Guptas are your friends, there is this huge 
logistical even to occur prior to the Gupta wedding.   
These are your confidantes, your friends, your son is 
in close business relationship.  Not only an aeroplane but 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 42 of 83 
 
helicopters, police escorts and Mr Zuma knew nothing about 
it?   On the face of it, it seems probable and some 
explanation needs to be given.  His office was involved in 
compiling reports thereof and there is a brick wall between 
any knowledge that the Presidency had prior knowledge, 
knowledge at the time, post-knowledge.  And then why would 
he obviously concur in the appointment of the alleged 
wrongdoer, the person who took the hit, Mr Koloane getting 
an appointment to the Netherlands as ambassador? 
 
All those facts need explanation because they raise 
10 
many more questions than just warrant putting the evidence 
to rest of the level that was given before you, Chair. 
 
Just one small issue, here is a person who facilitated 
a most serious breach of national security by, on his version, 
lying and on his version facilitating the Gupta landing at 
Waterkloof.  He goes with no doubt top security clearance as 
ambassador to the Netherlands.  Lots of questions that 
require answers, Chair. 
 
Then there is the Department of Communications and 
GCIS, the appointments and dismissals that took place 
20 
there, the need of GCIS to in effect finance New Age 
newspaper to advertising revenue and the like.  That 
evidence also with the apparent action or non-action of Mr 
Zuma that requires to be put and explained.   
But, once again, as one goes through all these 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 43 of 83 
 
individual events, a bigger picture against the build-up and 
the question we come back to all the time was this a 
complete course of action designed to benefit certain parties 
illegitimately and beyond the prescripts of the law and the 
Constitution. 
 
There is another example, Chair, that is the activities 
of BOSASA and the Department of Prison.  Chair, the 
evidence 
has 
been 
that 
BOSASA 
relied 
heavily 
on 
government contracts worth on average R2.5 billion.  There 
has been direct evidence as to how BOSASA bribed officials, 
10 
scale of about R66 million per annum, by estimate.   
Mr Agrizzi 
claims 
that 
Mr 
Zuma 
had 
a 
close 
relationship with BOSASA’s main shareholder and Chief 
Executive Mr Gavin Watson and they met frequently and  
there have been a number of allegations that have arisen out 
of that evidence. 
 
BOSASA appeared to benefit Mr Zuma and the 
governing party in many ways.  There is evidence that 
R300 000 a month was paid in cash to the Jacob Zuma 
Foundation, usually by handing it to Ms Dudu Myeni but at 
20 
least on one occasion directly to Mr Zuma.   
Mr Agrizzi and others testified that BOSASA paid for 
and catered for functions worth millions of rands for Mr 
Zuma, his family and the governing party.  We know of the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 44 of 83 
 
election core facility and at least one or even more generous 
donations to the ANC. 
 
Now in themselves, companies do donate to political 
parties, we know that.  The framework within which that 
takes place, the legal framework may change very shortly, 
but at the time donation was made.  The question is, was 
there a quid pro quo there?  And in this case there is 
evidence of the support, the monies paid directly and 
indirectly, the bribery.   
 
The quid pro quo involving Mr Zuma, support was 
10 
sought from Mr Zuma, protection from prosecution by the 
NPA.  We know that BOSASA was not prosecuted despite 
evidence being before it for a period of many, many years, 
that seems to have changed now but for a limited period after 
being investigated by the Special Investigations Unit.  That 
file lay dormant for almost a decade. 
 
That file, concerning the investigation into BOSASA’s 
allegedly corrupt facility, was handed over to Mr Koppies at 
that time by Ms Dudu Myeni, whose expenses, we know, in 
evidence, had been paid for by the Jacob Zuma Foundation.  
20 
What was the former president’s knowledge?  He had been 
asked directly by Mr Watson to deal with this investigation 
and prosecution, so the evidence goes.  What happens is 
that there is no prosecution, the matter lies dormant and the 
file then Ms Dudu Myeni hands over.  What is going on here?   
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 45 of 83 
 
 
Is this yet another example of protection – and I will 
come law enforcement agencies in a moment – of protection 
of malfeasance, of allowing a system to operate without 
consequence.   
 
And so we add BOSASA to the list, we add BOSASA 
to the file of allegations and it is difficult, Chair, to 
contemplate that this was all just matters happening in a 
coincidence of events over a period of time and that there 
was not a plan and intent and a guiding hand or guiding 
hands behind it. 
10 
 
The Karoo fracking example is another example 
where Mr Zuma was asked to intervene to facilitate a change 
in regulations to allow that deal to go through.  That 
evidence has been given but an example of Mr Gavin Watson 
on the one hand getting an organisation that obtain benefits 
to the tune of billions of rands from state owned or from 
government departments but gave donations and other 
benefits to members, senior officials within government 
and the executive and asked for a quid pro quo and 
appear to have received a quid pro quo particularly in 
20 
relation to the prosecution. 
 
Who benefited from this all, Chair?  There is 
evidence that Mr Duduzane Zuma benefited substantially 
from dealings and his involvement with the Guptas and 
Gupta-related entities.   
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 46 of 83 
 
 
Again the question may appear to some to have an 
obvious answer but the question needs to be asked, was it 
intended in the scheme of events when one looks at all 
the occurrences together, again beginning with attempts 
to influence appointments and dismissals at cabinet 
flowing down to the repurposing of SOEs followed by the 
corruption, the benefits of that flowing back to Guptas, 
Gupta-related entities and entities in which Mr Duduzane 
Zuma had an interest.   
Was that consequence intended?  Was it known?  
10 
Did you do anything about it?  Did you allow it to happen 
or did you cause it to happen?  Those questions need to 
be answered and ultimately answered by yourself, Chair, 
with as much assistance as you can obtain. 
 
There is evidence of direct payments to Mr Zuma, 
Chair.  The Gavin Watson/BOSASA payments, R300 000  
per month to the Jacob Zuma Foundation.  Those require 
an answer. 
 
The approximately R3 million paid to the Jacob 
Zuma Foundation by Ms Dudu Myeni, that evidence.  The 
20 
payments received in relation to the contract with Royal 
Security, evidence would have been given and a chance to 
put that before Mr Zuma would have been afforded.  The 
evidence, again Mr Zuma would have been presented with 
this evidence, and given an opportunity to respond or to 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 47 of 83 
 
think about how he would respond of monthly payments.   
 
What we know is that there was a project initiated 
to make payments in a monthly amount of several million 
rand from SSA funds to Mr Zuma.  There was a project.   
 
The question is, was that project implemented to 
its fullest?  The evidence is that that money went to a 
minister and it was the minister ’s – idea was that the 
minister would hand that money on.  There is no direct 
evidence that money been handed on but it is an obvious 
question to ask Mr Zuma, please tell us what happened 
10 
there? 
 
There 
is 
also 
evidence 
in 
relation 
to 
what 
happened with the sale of three farms or the purchase on 
sale of three farms, I will not go into detail there for the 
present, and other benefits.  Certainly there is evidence of 
benefits to the ANC and it would have been asked were 
the Guptas ever asked for favours and did the Guptas ever 
grant favours? 
 
We know that money was paid by BOSASA for ANC 
events and that there is evidence of PRASA assets being 
20 
used by the governing party at the time of elections.   
 
But be that as it may, Chair, there are numerous 
pieces 
of 
evidence, 
do 
not 
give 
that 
full 
picture, 
particularly the use of cash which is untraceable by its 
very nature and we have evidence and more evidence to 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 48 of 83 
 
come, Chair, that evidence comes to light, that much of 
the benefits, or many of the benefits received as a 
consequence or outcome of corrupt dealings in order to 
maintain – clearly in order to maintain the cooperation of 
all those involved in this network of individuals.  Cash was 
used, cash is untraceable.  There has been evidence and 
there will be more evidence.  That requires an answer.  
This use of cash, the allegations in relation to the use of 
cash of [indistinct] 18.49, something that we have only 
scratched the surface of in the investigations, Chair, and 
10 
it is something that by its very nature is difficult to reveal. 
 
Then we come to law enforcement agencies, Chair.  
I see I am way over time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We can take the adjournment, tea 
adjournment, now or if you prefer we can – you can – we 
can 
go 
on, 
let 
you 
finish 
and 
then 
we 
take 
the 
adjournment.  Maybe we should take it now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  We will take the tea 
adjournment now, it is nearly twenty five to twelve.  We 
20 
will resume at ten to twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may continue Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair.  Chair just to 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 49 of 83 
 
summarise 
we 
have 
evidence, 
and 
you 
have 
heard 
evidence led before you of attempts of particular networks 
of individuals and entities to influence appointments and 
dismissals at the highest level.   Both decisions ultimately 
were made by Mr Zuma in the period under review.    
 
That 
then 
filtered 
down 
to 
appointments 
and 
dismissals and reorganisation of State Owned Entities and 
government 
departments. 
 
The 
benefits 
from 
illegal 
unlawful illicit dealings that occurred during that period 
was a consequence of that period and I have dealt with is 
10 
that coincidence or was that intended come back to the 
very 
source 
where 
the 
influence 
was 
sought 
to 
be 
originated in the first place, but the question then arises 
Chair where were the defenders of our legal order whilst 
this was all happening, where was Parliament in its 
oversight role, where were the various oversight bodies, 
we know that the Public Protector intervened eventually, 
but very late, and where in particular were the law 
enforcement agency and the question arises were those 
law 
enforcement 
agencies 
deliberately 
disabled, 
20 
deliberately influenced to allow this project, if it was a 
project, to continue to its logical outcome, to fruition, or is 
there some other reason why what happened within the 
sphere of law enforcement agencies, in relation to the 
evidence that you have been given Chair to explain it, and 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 50 of 83 
 
that must be explained Chair and there are many who can 
explain, but Mr Zuma is one who could assist you in 
coming to a conclusion in that regard. 
 
The evidence is reasonably overwhelming Chair, 
you can make a finding, but to get a complete picture one 
needs the complete evidence.  The most stark example is 
the 
BOSASA 
example, 
I 
have 
dealt 
with 
it, 
the 
investigation, 
rampant 
corruption, 
SIU 
investigation, 
dormant for almost a decade, and we know that certain key 
individuals appointed directly, or indirectly by Mr Zuma or 
10 
persons acting under Mr Zuma, to interfere with that 
prosecution.   I will come to some detail in a moment, but 
that’s the starkest example, but there are others, so we 
know from evidence led 
before you Chair that Law 
Enforcement Agencies failed to detect, prosecute and 
prevent wide scale corruption during the period under 
review. 
 
Why?  Was this just coincidental yet again or was it 
intended that it be so.   Law enforcement agencies the 
evidence has been were considerably weakened in the fight 
20 
against corruption and crime during that same period.   It 
is instructive Chair that beyond the period that this 
commission has been concentrating on, we refer to it as 
the period under review, we know from evidence, and it is 
a fact that the National Director of Public Prosecutions has 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 51 of 83 
 
a ten year plan.  The intent of that is stability and 
effectiveness and independence.   Not one National 
Director of Public Prosecutions has lasted that ten year 
term. 
 
There are examples Chair of the law enforcement 
agencies being used to target persons who were intent on 
combating corruption, a list of them, days of evidence have 
been given before you in that regard.  Conversely Chair 
there are several examples of persons or entities not being 
prosecuted for corruption when they should have been.  
10 
Again sheer coincidence or part of an intended plan?    
 
Executive interference in the operation of law 
enforcement agencies there has been evidence before you 
that 
that 
has 
occurred, 
and 
again 
several 
previous 
appointments and dismissals have been placed before you 
by way of evidence within law enforcement agencies. 
 
Now we know Chair that as President Mr Zuma had 
the power to appoint many of the most senior officials in 
law enforcement, including Ministers of Police, the National 
Director of Public Prosecutions or Provincial and Special 
20 
Directors of Public Prosecutions, the head of Special 
Investigations Unit, Commissioner of Peace, Commissioner 
of the South, so those all were direct appointees, I think 
that is correct Chair. 
 
We know for example, you have heard extensive 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 52 of 83 
 
evidence of the tenure of Mr Nxasana as head of the NDPP 
and it appears according to the evidence that Mr Nxasana 
was 
determined 
to 
hold 
Ms 
Jiba 
and 
Mr 
Mgwebi 
accountable for their conduct in a number of cases, 
including interference in the BOSASA prosecution.  Their 
conduct has been criticised by the Courts over and over 
again.  The very person who sought to hold them to 
account we know of the circumstances surrounding the 
termination of his employment as NDPP. 
 
Chair we have numbers of examples in evidence of 
10 
politically connected individuals being protected from the 
law, General Mgwebi is one example, you have heard 
extensive evidence about that.  The interference in the 
prosecution of the BOSASA entity, the investigation and 
prosecution and the interference in the investigation and 
prosecution of Mr Panday, you have got that evidence.  It 
is clear Chair, who was a business partner of two of Mr 
Zuma’s family members, this needs – this is something that 
needs to be raised, it needs to be answered, why were 
politically connected individuals apparently protected by 
20 
law enforcement agencies.  From the very top why were 
those appointments made, why was this not detected, why 
was it not dealt with?   The glaring question of course is 
there can be no doubt that those in power knew about 
corruption taking place and the obvious question that ought 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 53 of 83 
 
to have been asked by those in power, by oversight bodies 
at Parliament, is why is this happening and why is nothing 
being done to stop it happening. 
 
Where is the accountability?   We have got a range 
of – a powerful constitutional institution with vast powers 
and yet nothing is being done.   Again, is this mere 
neglect, is it mere coincidence that at the time all the 
events highlighted by the evidence as happening law 
enforcement agencies are ...[indistinct] or is this part of an 
overall and deliberate plan, and the evidence appears to 
10 
indicate the latter was the case Chair and that requires an 
answer.  
 
As the Constitutional Court said ...[indistinct] to the 
fundamental institutions of our democracy.  
 
We also have a number of examples Chair of the 
prosecution of persons intent on combating corruption, the 
North West Unit for example and its activities.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Your voice is dropping, I don’t know 
whether it is because – maybe the aircon is too high. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Social media pointed that out to 
20 
me in the break, and it has been reported, so it is a habit 
that I have built up for over 40 years it is difficult to break, 
I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do your best.   Ja, but I think the aircon 
the noise is just too high, so if somebody can turn it down 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 54 of 83 
 
a little bit, even if not turn it off.   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So we have the contemplated 
prosecutions of Generals Dramat, Shadrick, Sibiya, those 
were persons investigating the Mdluli case, the Nkandla 
case, the Panday case, there are a range of examples but 
they fall under two heads Chair.  Quite apart from the 
inaction and the failure to act, which itself is an important 
issue that needs to be canvassed, not only with Mr Zuma 
but with others too.   
 
The prosecution of persons intent on combating 
10 
corruption, a range of examples under that head, and 
secondly the protection of politically connected individuals 
from the law.  Those two happened in tandem, they were 
positive acts on the part of law enforcement agencies.  So 
law enforcement agencies were not asleep, they were 
entirely active, they had in charge of them persons 
appointed by Mr Zuma.  So it is not enough to say this 
happened by default Chair, an active finance capacitated 
series of law enforcement agencies, not one, allowing this 
to happen under its watch. 
20 
 
Again it is difficult to conclude that this was just yet 
another coincidence in the chain of events that is the 
subject matter of our terms of reference Chair and the 
evidence led before you, and it is something that needs to 
be explained by persons who were in charge. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 55 of 83 
 
 
Then Chair with regard to the Intelligence Agencies 
you 
heard 
substantial 
evidence, 
there 
was 
evidence 
previously from Messrs Shaik, Njenje and Magathuka in 
relation 
to 
the 
reorganisation 
of 
the 
State 
Security 
Agencies 
under 
Mr 
Zuma’s 
watch. 
 
He 
issued 
a 
proclamation creating the amalgamation of which – of State 
Security Agencies under one director general about which 
you have heard evidence and the findings of the Mfumadi 
panel are stark, if I may just quote this something again 
that would be for the former President.  This panel of 
10 
experts thereafter serious investigation and deliberation 
reach the following conclusion: 
“Our key finding is that there has been a serious 
politicisation 
and 
fractionalisation 
of 
the 
intelligence community over the past decade or 
more, based on factions in the ruling party resulting 
in 
an 
almost 
complete 
disregard 
for 
the 
Constitution, policy, Legislation and other prescripts 
and turning our civilian intelligence community into 
a private resource who serve the political and 
20 
personal interests of particular individuals.   We are 
concerned that the cumulative effect of the above 
led to the deliberate repurposing of the SSA.” 
Now that finding in itself mirrors the evidence that you 
have of the reorganisation and repurposing at cabinet 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 56 of 83 
 
level, at SOE level, in government departments and here 
you have the same terminology used in relation to the 
State Security Agency, and we have heard that evidence in 
the past two weeks, I won’t repeat it but in time it would 
have 
been 
put 
to 
the 
former 
president 
for 
his 
input/comment and for his evidence in that regard because 
he knew.   Now that finding Chair is a finding that says this 
was no coincidental, it was a deliberate repurposing.  The 
same question then will be asked in relation to the 
purposing and reorganisation in SOE, repurposing and 
10 
reorganisation 
in 
the 
cabinet, 
repurposing 
and 
reorganisation in relation to the Revenue Service, the 
Department of Mineral Resources.  All that evidence that 
has piled up before you over three years and the question 
is are those words appropriate, is that finding appropriate, 
not only for the SSA but for all the other evidence that you 
have heard, that the cumulative effective the above all the 
evidence before you can only be explained by reference to 
a deliberate repurposing of State Organs, State Machinery 
illicitly to benefit persons through the unlawful acquisition 
20 
of State resources. 
 
That is the essential question on which we would be 
concentrating with Mr Zuma, and all its component parts, 
because it is only when one puts all the component parts 
together one asks the question but didn’t this happen in 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 57 of 83 
 
that department, didn’t this happen in that SOE, didn’t it all 
happen at the same time?   Was it not a consequence of a 
series 
of 
events 
that 
initiated 
this 
process 
in 
the 
beginning? 
 
It may be that conclusion is unavoidable Chair, but 
one must hesitate before drawing that conclusion and look 
at a conspectus of evidence first to see whether it is the 
most reasonable or only conclusion that can legitimately be 
drawn. 
 
I am not going to repeat the evidence of the SSA 
10 
personnel, it is recent and well known to you Chair and the 
public, but what is important to in particular is the extent to 
which Mr Zuma is alleged to have benefitted himself in a 
way that according to the evidence acceded the mandate 
was not part of the mandate of the State Security Agency.  
Personal protection, the project in relation to money which 
we haven’t heard all the evidence yet and we don’t know 
all the evidence yet, but there will be further evidence in 
relation to payment of those monies at least to the first 
stop in the journey intended for that money to the Minister 
20 
concerned, and other projects. 
 
If one will recall a speech that Mr Zuma gave to 
students at a university over a year ago, perhaps three 
years ago, where he emphasized that State Capture can 
only exist if government, the executive, Parliament and the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 58 of 83 
 
Judiciary are all captured or sought to be captured. 
 
Well the obvious answer to that is you don’t need to 
capture the judiciary because matters never get to it, they 
are halted at the law enforcement agencies, but it seems 
that some people thought that that might be appropriate to 
do, whether that finally came to fruition or not will be the 
subject matter of further evidence, but the project it 
extends further than just SOE’s and particular government 
departments in relation to procurement.  So the allegation 
would go and so it would be put to Mr Zuma. 
10 
 
We had evidence of the Principal Agent Network 
Project and an investigation into the activities of that 
project and its association with Mr Arthur Frazer and that 
the evidence goes was shut down on the direct or indirect 
instruction of Mr Zuma.  That is something that needs to be 
investigated, is this coincidental or is it part of the overall 
project. 
 
Then Chair one has the attempts to influence 
appointments, appointments and dismissals being effected, 
the consequences of those in government departments and 
20 
SOE’s, the flow, the illicit flow of money and the – basically 
the alleged theft of State resources flowing back to 
particular beneficiaries.   One has that.  One has outside 
of that whole process the questions that arise over the 
activities or failures of the law enforcement agencies from 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 59 of 83 
 
at least Crime Intelligence, State Security Agency, the NPA 
and the like questions and many answers that have been 
put before you, but again in answer to the question how 
could this happen.  As you have directed Chair one needs 
to look at the oversight body.    
 
How could it happen that Parliament did not deal 
with this issue.   How could it happen that Parliament 
failed or apparently failed according to the evidence, in its 
own constitutional duty.  Those are questions that the Head 
of State needs to deal with so that you can understand 
10 
Chair what the answer is to that question, and there would 
be an answer, but the answer to that question is either 
found by you on the evidence before you, without answers 
from Mr Zuma or you have the benefit of their input.   It is 
a collaborated effort to assist you to meet your terms of 
reference, it is not a war.   It is not an attack on anybody, 
you want that evidence before you, you have taken every 
step possible, including steps that the – might have been 
seen as conciliatory but Chair the – this Commission is 
not, as many have sought in defence of their own positions 
20 
to paint it as an aggressive single-minded body that seeks 
to make premature finding.   It has asked all concerned to 
contribute 
to 
its 
deliberation 
and 
it 
has 
invited 
or 
commanded a range of people from all sectors of the 
community to come before it to assist you, made repeated 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 60 of 83 
 
calls for people to come forward Chair. 
 
The one outstanding track in the evidence before 
you is that of the person that is head of the ship, the 
captain of the ship and it is a great pity you may be 
compelled to make findings in the absence of the person at 
the wheel of the ship, but so be it, it is not through lack of 
effort that that position has been reached. 
 
The Regulatory Environment ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you were mentioning earlier on 
about – you were mentioning the stance taken by Mr Zuma, 
10 
you might not have referred to him by name, in regard to 
the whole issue of State Capture that he was saying well 
nobody says Parliament was captured, or the judiciary was 
captured, but one wonders within the context of our 
electoral 
system 
and 
the 
...[indistinct] 
representation 
system or maybe irrespective of that, whether those who 
may have pursued the agenda of State Capture could have 
said well if you capture the head of State, if you capture 
the President you know that he is also the President of the 
ruling party and if he is powerful in the ruling party then 
20 
members of the ruling party in Parliament might make sure 
that – the party might instruct them not to pursue certain 
matters, and therefore if you capture the President of a 
country indirectly you can render even Parliament – you 
can ensure that Parliament does not investigate matters 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 61 of 83 
 
that it should investigate and I heard evidence about 
proposals or requests that were made that the Guptas be 
investigated and the committee did not do that. 
 
We also – I also heard evidence how despite the 
fact that the SIU had conducted a certain investigation into 
BOSASA and had presented to the Correctional Services 
Committee, Portfolio Committee a report that members of 
that committee itself found to reveal – I can’t remember the 
adjective they used or the Chairperson of the Commission 
used to describe how horrific they found its way in terms of 
10 
the 
conduct 
but 
nevertheless 
nothing 
was 
done 
by 
Parliament itself, by the committee itself to stop what was 
happening at Correctional Services, between Correctional 
Services and BOSASA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.   There is no doubt – well 
perhaps one should not put it that strongly, but there has 
been fair and convincing evidence that the Gupta family at 
the very least, let alone those in charge of the BOSASA 
and other institutions sought directly to influence or even 
exercise a degree of control over the former President, 
20 
that evidence is there.  The degree to which he can explain 
the apparent cooperation that was lent to those efforts 
through appointments and dismissals, non-prosecutions, 
prosecutions and the like, the SSA evidence to the effect 
that the SSA investigation into the Gupta influence was 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 62 of 83 
 
shut down, that evidence all requires explanation but there 
is just one point that needs to be made and that is that this 
would not have been possible it may be only through the 
influence of one person, but there are others too that 
perhaps should be called to account in that regard, and 
that is another issue that needs to be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, and one should recall that 
early in 2019 I announced publically that I had a meeting 
with the current President and I had indicated that this 
Commission could not be said to have properly completed 
10 
its job without the executive, members of the executive 
who served under Mr Zuma, including him because he was 
the Deputy President, coming to the Commission and 
saying what they know and dealing with questions that the 
Commission will have, and I said the ruling party too this 
Commission cannot be said to have properly completed its 
job without the ruling party also coming before the 
Commission and say what it knew, when did it become 
aware of certain things, what steps did it take to deal with 
those matters, or allegations of State Capture, and this is 
20 
important because the party is the one that goes to the 
voters and say vote for us, and obviously usually there is 
already somebody that they present to save you if you vote 
for us in sufficient numbers and we have the majority this 
will be the President.    
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 63 of 83 
 
 
Now the ruling party having heard evidence that has 
been led in this Commission, having become aware of a lot 
of things that we have had relating to allegation of State 
Capture and corruption during Mr Zuma’s presidency, they 
ought to come to the Commission to say what do they have 
to say about the fact that they were the ruling party at the 
time and this was somebody they presented to the voters 
to say this will be the President, and of course there are 
other matters in relation to them being the ruling party.  
They need to come now – I mentioned that publicly early in 
10 
2019 that I have mentioned it to the current president and 
he had not hesitated to say he would lead the government 
delegation to come and give evidence to the Commission.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He has never changed from that position 
and it is the question of the Commission establishing the 
dates for that but he also told me that the ruling party, the 
ANC, also agreed that it would come and give evidence 
before the Commission. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So they have indicated that and 
arrangements will be made for that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There has been plenty of evidence 
to answer the first question that you pose frequently, Chair, 
and that is what happened but the question that needs to 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 64 of 83 
 
be answer in relation to what you have just said, could it 
happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, exactly. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   How could this happen? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Exactly, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, the picture that has been 
painted thus far is not the end of the story and I will 
summarise 
what 
other 
elements 
there 
are 
to 
– 
the 
regulatory framework, the banks attempting to close bank 
accounts because of what were perceived to be dealings 
10 
fraught with risk and other questions arising over them, 
why would parliament – or not, sorry, why would the 
cabinet, why would the task team interfere with it?  Those 
are questions that need to be answered.  
Another question, the Financial Intelligence Centre, 
these illicit dealings somehow ought to have been picked 
up earlier.  Why were they not picked up?  The Financial 
Intelligence Centre, the evidence has been, gave plenty of 
information through to law enforcement agencies, that was 
not acted upon.   
20 
But importantly, in the light of evidence that has 
been given in the last two weeks about the role of the 
State Security Agency, there was an attempt to delay the 
passing of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act which 
would have strengthened the activities of the – the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 65 of 83 
 
capacity and activities of the Financial Intelligence Centre 
Act but there was also a proposal that would be put to Mr 
Zuma that the Financial Intelligence Centre should be 
moved away from Treasury’s jurisdiction into the security 
cluster.  Now the significance of that on its own is one 
thing but seen in the light of all the other evidence, it is 
significant and it is something that requires answer. 
And then, Chair, the importance of what the legal 
team has termed the narrative, an informed electorate is 
essential to the operation of the democracy that our 
10 
constitution seeks to establish and protect and to the 
extent that news or information is distorted, to the extent 
that population is misled as to what really is occurring, to 
that extent the fundamental aspects of our electoral 
democracy may be undermined. 
So serious questions arise as to the attempts to 
influence the media, attempts to establish alternative and 
sympathetic media using state funds, all that evidence has 
been before you with relation to the New Age newspaper, 
ANN7, the activities of the former President in attempting 
20 
to deal with editorial policy in relation to ANN7 and their 
New – Sundaram’s evidence you will have recalled.  That 
whole conspectus of evidence needs to be put into the 
picture because the components of what might be alleged 
to be the state capture project would be incomplete if it did 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 66 of 83 
 
not have its public relations arm and there is evidence that 
indeed it did have a public relations arm ranging from 
attempts 
to 
influence 
media, 
to 
obtain 
what 
is 
euphemistically 
called 
positive 
news 
as 
opposed 
to 
negative news or critical news, to the involvement of Bell 
Pottinger in its campaign.  All that evidence too will in due 
course be collated and put before you but it is an important 
part of the big picture. 
So, Chair, there is more detail particularly in 
relation to the lack of accountability that appears to have 
10 
been 
a 
concomitant 
series 
of 
events 
accompanying 
everything that you have heard over the last three years. 
In summary, and I am not going to go through them 
all because of far beyond my allotted time, and the 
evidence will come to the fore in due course, but the 
question of accountability or the lack of accountability, the 
lack of detection, action and accountability is central to the 
question as to whether this was just a coincidental series 
of events from beginning to end or whether it was the – the 
outcome was intended and planned as part of what might 
20 
be termed – you will in due course decide what is state 
capture 
and 
whether 
the 
evidence 
points 
to 
that 
conclusion. 
Chair, when all the evidence before you, including 
evidence led and evidence still to come, is considered, at 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 67 of 83 
 
least provisionally certain conclusions need to be tested if 
not made and those conclusions, provisional conclusions, 
questions even need – or have needed to be put to the 
captain of the ship, the person at the wheel, during the 
period under review, even if they are not final findings, 
provisional, question asked.   
The 
various 
appointments 
and 
dismissals 
of 
ministers, state officials, SOE board and executives had 
consequences such as the corrupt appropriation of state 
resources on a massive scale.  Were those consequences 
10 
coincidental or were they intended consequences?  Among 
the beneficiaries of the alleged corruption were the very 
persons who influenced or attempted to influence the 
course of action right from the very beginning with the 
National Executive cabinet appointments and dismissal. 
Vast amounts of state funds then flowed to a 
network of individuals and entities some of whom were 
associated with the very persons who sought to influence 
the project or alleged project in the first case.  Was this 
coincidental or planned?   
20 
No responsible state entity, parliament, at least for 
a time, law enforcement agencies, Chapter 9 institutions, 
at least for a time until the Public Protector report, were 
able to, were allowed to or did detect and put a stop to this 
pattern of contact(?) and its various component parts.   
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 68 of 83 
 
On the contrary, oversight and law enforcement 
mechanisms appear and the allegations are that they were 
deliberately harnessed to support the project or at least to 
prevent it being halted.  All this was accompanied by public 
narrative or an attempted public narrative which attempted 
to defend and justify what was occurring and to undermine 
those who opposed it.  Chair, this Commission has been 
the victim of that narrative as well but that is something for 
another day. 
Other elements of our society colluded or appeared 
10 
to collude or are alleged to have colluded in the success of 
what might be termed a project or enterprise.   
The auditors profession, elements of the legal 
profession, was such collusion merely passive?  Was it a 
failure to act or ought other elements of our society have 
been called to account in the overall scheme of the 
evidence that has presented? 
And in the end, Chair, Mr Zuma through – and I 
stress, 
honest 
cooperation, 
might 
have 
assisted 
the 
Commission to understand fully not only what happened 
20 
but how it could have happened, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are at twenty five to one.  You are 
done.  I am thinking that whether we should – I should say 
something now or until we finish or whether we should 
rather take the lunch break and we come back at two, so 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 69 of 83 
 
before I announce what the Commission is going to do 
about what has happened.  Have you got suggestions? 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Chair, 
considering 
the 
circumstances and what you as Chair would say about the 
nonappearance today and its outcome and consequences, 
they are significant and it is not for me to say, Chair, but 
some consideration perhaps ought to be given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Although, Chair, on the other hand, 
the consequences seem to be fairly clear. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, we are very clear about what needs 
to be done.  There is no confusion about what should be 
done, our law is not deficient in this respect at all but it 
might be appropriate to adjourn and then come back at two 
and then I will make my remarks about some of the matters 
that have been raised and then announce what the 
Commission – what next the Commission will do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At two, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, at two. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to adjourn and we will 
resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not delivering a judgment or a ruling 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 70 of 83 
 
because there is no ruling that I need to make but I do need 
to indicate what is to happen as far as the commission is 
concerned in the light of these latest developments involving 
Mr Jacob Zuma.   
 
 
In terms of a summons that was issued by the 
Secretary of the Commission Mr Zuma was supposed to 
appear before the commission from today up to Friday to 
give evidence and to be questioned on various matters which 
have been investigated and are still being investigated by 
the commission.  Some of which were indicated by Mr 
10 
Pretorius in his address to me this morning. 
 
Because Mr Zuma had previously walked out of the 
commission or fled the commission when he was supposed 
to take the witness stand on the 19 t h of November 2020 even 
though he knew that he had been served with a summons to 
appear before the commission and to give evidence and be 
questioned and to remain in attendance until excused by the 
Chairperson he had walked out without permission and had 
not 
offered 
any 
explanation 
for 
his 
conduct 
to 
the 
commission. 
 
20 
 
The commission feared that he would not comply with 
any further summons that could be issued against him by the 
commission and for that reason the commission applied – 
lodged an application to the Constitutional Court in the 
Constitutional Court for various orders but mainly for orders 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 71 of 83 
 
that would compel Mr Zuma to comply with the summons 
issued by the commission and appear before the commission 
and answer questions that would be put to him and to remain 
in attendance and not leave without permission – without the 
permission of the Chairperson of the commission. 
 
When the commission launched its application it 
served Mr Zuma with a copy of the papers and he was 
informed in those papers that if he wanted to oppose the 
application 
in 
other 
words 
if 
he 
did 
not 
want 
the 
Constitutional Court to grant the orders that the commission 
10 
was asking for he should file – he should indicate his 
intention to oppose and file before – in the Constitutional 
Court affidavits where he would set out his case and state 
why the Constitutional Court should not make an order 
compelling him to appear before the commission. 
 
In the affidavit of the Secretary of the Commission 
one of the points that was made quite clear which Mr Zuma 
and his lawyers would have seen is that it was going to be 
argued before the Constitutional Court that the fact that Mr 
Zuma was going to be pursuing a review application in the 
20 
High Court to have my decision not to recuse myself 
reviewed and set aside by the High Court would not in law be 
a ground to justify him not appearing before the commission 
or not complying with the summons.  That issue was placed 
in the papers.  Mr Zuma and his lawyers would have seen 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 72 of 83 
 
that and it was up to Mr Zuma and his lawyers if they thought 
that that was not correct in law or that that was wrong to 
have participated in the proceedings in the Constitutional 
Court and to have placed their argument that the fact that he 
was in – going to pursue a review application was a ground 
for him not to comply with the summons and not to appear 
before the commission. 
 
They knew that that point was to be argued.  They 
knew exactly what the commission would argue.  They chose 
not to contest that in the Constitutional Court.  They chose 
10 
not to participate in those proceedings. 
 
One of the points also that was made in their 
founding affidavit deposed to by the Secretary of the 
Commission in that application to the Constitutional Court 
was the point that no witness before this commission 
including Mr Zuma has a right to remain silent once they 
take the witness back. 
 
The commission raised this issue because when Mr 
Zuma’s counsel presented his argument in support of the 
recusal application on the 16t h of November 2020 his counsel 
20 
at some stage said that he could put Mr Zuma on the witness 
stand and ask him to say nothing. 
 
So the commission realised that there seemed to be 
a view on the part of Mr Zuma’s lawyers that a witness 
before this commission has a right to remain silent after 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 73 of 83 
 
taking the witness stand.   
 
So the commission raised this issue in the papers 
before the Constitutional Court and made it clear that it was 
going to argue that there is no such right in proceedings 
before the commission.  And that such a right belongs to an 
accused 
person 
in 
criminal 
proceedings 
not 
in 
this 
commission. 
 
So when Mr Zuma and his lawyers were served with 
the papers that the commission lodged in the Constitutional 
Court they knew that this is what – this is part of what the 
10 
commission would argue before the Constitutional Court. 
 
What the commission said was that the only part 
which they could indicate is that the privilege against self-
incrimination is available in appropriate circumstances to a 
witness who appears before the commission and that as far 
as Mr Zuma is concerned that privilege would apply to him 
as well but not the right to remain silent. 
 
When therefore Mr Zuma and his lawyers decided 
that they were not going to oppose the commission’s 
application to the Constitutional Court and that Mr Zuma was 
20 
not going to participate in those proceedings they knew that 
this was one of the issues that were going to be raised and if 
they believed that they had a case to the contrary it was up 
to them to place their arguments before the Constitutional 
Court to enable the Constitutional Court to find in their 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 74 of 83 
 
favour if they were able to persuade the Constitutional 
Court.  They chose not to do so either. 
 
Mr Zuma had a full opportunity to put whatever 
reasons he believed to put before the Constitutional Court 
whatever reasons he believed justified him in not complying 
with 
the 
summons 
for 
him 
not 
appearing 
before 
the 
commission and allowed the Constitutional Court to decide 
whether those reasons were sound or not.  He chose not to 
do any of them. 
 
He was free to also say to the Constitutional Court 
10 
you cannot compel me to appear before this Chairperson of 
this commission because of the following reasons if he 
thought that his reasons were sound and would be regarded 
as acceptable by the Constitutional Court. 
 
It is not clear why if he thought he had good reasons 
why he should not be compelled to appear before the 
commission why he chose not to put those reasons before 
the commission – before the Constitutional Court. 
 
The Constitutional Court handed down its judgment 
and made an order that he should appear before the 
20 
commission.  It made it clear that he has no right to remain 
silent once he takes the witness stand.   
 
In doing so the Constitutional Court did not take away 
any rights that Mr Zuma may have had because even before 
the judgment of the Constitutional Court he did not have the 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 75 of 83 
 
right to remain silent in these proceedings.  Actually those 
who follow the proceedings of the commission closely may 
remember that early in November I think on the 6t h of 
November in the – or on the occasion when Ms Dudu Myeni 
appeared before the commission the evidence leader Ms 
Kate Hofmeyr addressed the question of the right to remain 
silent 
and 
the 
issue 
of 
the 
privilege 
against 
self-
incrimination.   
 
In that address which can be accessed by anybody 
who would like to access it in the transcripts she made it 
10 
clear that as far as the evidence leaders are concerned there 
is no right to remain silent.  There was only the privilege 
against self-incrimination and indeed she referred to cases – 
to case law that is with the issue of privilege against self-
incrimination by our courts and in this regard the re – she 
referred to a judgment of the Appellate Division in Magmoed 
which – or Magmoed versus Janse Van Rensburg and Others 
1993 Volume 1 SA777 A for Appellate Division which dealt 
with that issue. 
 
In that case too as long ago as that time the 
20 
Appellate Division had made it clear that the privilege 
against refusal to give evidence on the strength of the 
privilege against self-incrimination is not there for the taking 
and 
that 
there 
must 
be 
reasonable 
grounds 
for 
an 
apprehension that the witness may incriminate himself or 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 76 of 83 
 
herself. 
 
That the Constitutional Court also said so it is not 
something that really had not been there before.  There 
might be one or two aspects that were emphasised or added 
by the Constitutional Court but that the – there must be 
reasonable grounds before the privilege can be evoked had 
been dealt with by our courts before. 
 
In fact either on the last day when Ms Myeni gave 
evidence or towards the end of her evidence I specifically 
dealt or requested the legal team and it is in the transcript 
10 
that they should carefully go through Ms Myeni’s evidence to 
see whether all the questions that she refused to answer on 
the basis of a privilege whether there were reasonable 
grounds of that. 
 
So I – in effect I did not make a ruling – any final 
ruling that she had correctly invoked it.  I allowed that the 
legal team should go through the transcript carefully and 
then where they believe that there are no reasonable 
grounds she can be called back and she can – that issue can 
be dealt with.  Ms Myeni has not dealt with certain issues 
20 
relating to Eskom and she is supposed to come back and 
when she comes back you can – once the legal team has 
carefully gone through her evidence and all the questions 
she refused to answer she can be asked questions about the 
existence or non-existence of reasonable grounds for her 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 77 of 83 
 
apprehension that she would not incriminate herself if she 
answered certain questions. 
 
Do I repeat my request to the legal team to please go 
through that evidence and come to a – take a view so that it 
can be dealt with properly? 
 
So with regard to Mr Zuma the law would be the same 
that would apply to his evidence.  The Constitutional Court 
has not taken away any rights of his as far as that privilege – 
the privilege against self-incrimination is concerned. 
 
It is a pity that Mr Zuma has decided not to appear 
10 
before the commission today.  In defiance of the summons 
issued by the commission and in defiance of the order of the 
Constitutional Court our highest court in the land. 
 
It would be a pity if anybody did it but that it was – 
this was done by a former President of the Republic 
someone who twice stood before the nation and took an oath 
that he would uphold the constitution of the Republic and 
protect it is a great pity. 
 
The 
commission 
did 
not 
just 
rush 
to 
issuing 
summonses against Mr Zuma to compel him to appear before 
20 
it.  The commission did not just rush to the Constitutional 
Court to get an order to compel Mr Zuma to appear before it.  
The commission did so when it was clear that he really was 
not prepared to comply with the summons. 
 
And the Constitutional Court has made it clear in its 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 78 of 83 
 
judgment that a witness who has been summoned to appear 
before the commission is not supposed just to come to be 
present here.  He or she must come to testify and answer 
questions and that he or she may not leave before the 
proceedings are completed or before he or she is excused by 
the Chairperson. 
 
On 
the 
19t h 
of 
November 
Mr 
Zuma 
left 
the 
proceedings of the commission before they were completed 
and without permission from the Chairperson even though a 
few minutes before he left he had been reminded by Mr 
10 
Pretorius that it was not up to him to just up and go. 
 
An order of any court is binding on those to whom it 
applies.  A summons to also binding on the person to whom 
it is directed and if a person has been issued with a 
summons – has been served with the a summons to appear 
in court or in any forum or tribunal and he and she thinks 
that the summons should not have been issued or the 
summons is irregular it is not up to that person to just ignore 
the summons or to defy it. 
 
His or her obligation is to approach the courts and 
20 
tell the courts why he or she says the summons should not 
have been issued or why he says the summons is irregular 
and should be set aside. 
 
And only if he or she succeeds in getting the court to 
set the summons aside is he or she entitled not to appear.  
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 79 of 83 
 
But as long as the summons has not been set aside it is 
valid and binding on the person and he or she must comply 
with the summons. 
 
That principle was stated by the Constitutional Court 
in the context of the Public Protector’s Remedial action in 
the Nklandla matter and Mr Zuma should know that principle.   
 
In this case he has decided to ignore the summonses 
issued by the commission and not to go to court to have 
them set aside if he thought they were invalid or they were 
irregular but to just ignore them as if they do not exist. 
10 
 
First he walked out of the commission proceedings on 
the 19 t h of November. 
 
Second despite having been served with a summons 
to appear before the commission in the week beginning on 
the 18t h January 2021 he decided to not – not to appear even 
after he had been reminded by the commission that the fact 
that the judgment of the Constitutional Court had not been 
given did not mean that the summons had been suspended 
or set aside and that he should appear he decided not to 
appear. 
20 
 
He has done the same thing again. 
 
This is very serious because if it is allowed to prevail 
there will lawlessness and chaos in the courts.  Because 
there may be other who will decide to follow his example 
when they are served with summonses and other court 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 80 of 83 
 
processes 
and 
decide 
that 
they 
can 
ignore 
them.  
Summonses and subpoenas get issued in our courts every 
day throughout the breadth and length of 00:24:04 in the 
Magistrate Courts in the High Courts and in other tribunals 
and if the message that is sent out is that people can ignore 
or disregard or defy summonses and orders of courts that 
get issued by various courts every day in our country and 
that they can defy those with impunity there will be very little 
that will be left of our democracy. 
 
Our constitution tells us in – tells us that we are all 
10 
equal before it.  We are all subjects to the constitution and 
the law and we are all required to obey orders of office and if 
we are not happy we are not supposed to just sit back we 
should take steps to approach appropriate courts to appeal 
or to have those orders reviewed and when it is the highest 
court of the land that is the highest court of the land and we 
– you are bound whether you like the order or not you are 
bound by it and you must comply. 
 
There should be no two legal systems in regard to 
business.  There should be no rules for some and other rules 
20 
for others.  We should all be subject to the same rules. 
 
Whether I am the Deputy Chief Justice of the Country 
or I am the Chief Justice of the Country; I am the President 
of the Country; I am the former President of the Country we 
should all be subject to the same rules. 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 81 of 83 
 
 
That is the constitution and all our laws. 
 
There are witnesses who are supposed to appear 
before the commission next week and in the weeks after 
that.  Some may be wondering what will happen because 
they too may have been issued with summonses by this 
commission.  
 
There are more than 250 witnesses who have come – 
who have appeared before me over the past 3 years.  Many 
of them have appeared without being compelled.  Some have 
been compelled and they subjected themselves to the law 
10 
and appeared. 
 
None of those more than 250 something witnesses 
has asked me to recuse myself.  Only Mr Zuma has done so.  
I have been – I have just completed 24 years of service on 
the bench as a Judge and many litigants have come and 
gone and appeared before me literally thousands in trials, 
motion court and appeals and only Mr Zuma out of all these 
has ever asked me to recuse myself. 
 
But it is fine because he is entitled to raise whatever 
issues or concerns he has but then they must be dealt with 
20 
within the legal system and if he is not happy with my 
decision he is free to take the next steps in terms of review 
but as we understand the position he is not entitled because 
of that to refuse to appear before the commission and to 
refuse to comply with the summons and to refuse to comply 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 82 of 83 
 
with an order of our highest court. 
 
Even all of these circumstances as I said earlier on 
before lunch I have to indicate what the commission will do 
and our law is clear there is no luck 00:29:25 on this matter. 
 
The commission views Mr Zuma’s conduct in a very 
serious light particularly because it is repeated conduct.  
The commission has not treated Mr Zuma 00:29:52.  He has 
no valid or sound reasons for not appearing before the 
commission. 
 
The commission has taken note that in this type of 
10 
situation the law makes provision that it may apply for what 
is called – it may institute what is called contempt of court 
proceedings.  The commission will do so. 
 
What that entails is that the commission will make an 
application to the Constitutional Court which is the court that 
made the order that Mr Zuma has defied and seek an order 
that Mr Zuma is guilty of contempt of court and if the 
Constitutional Court reaches that conclusion then it is in its 
discretion what to do. 
 
One of the things it can do is to impose a term of 
20 
imprisonment on Mr Zuma.  Another would be for it to impose 
a fine.  The commission will approach the Constitutional 
Court and ask it to impose a term of imprisonment on Mr 
Zuma if it finds that he is guilty of contempt of court. 
 
It will be up to the court what it considers appropriate 
15 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 344 
 
Page 83 of 83 
 
but that is what the commission’s position is. 
 
Mr Zuma will be given a full opportunity to oppose 
that application if he wishes to and place before the 
Constitutional Court whatever facts or arguments he wishes 
to place before it and the Constitutional Court will decide. 
 
That is all I wanted to say.  I think it clear what the 
commission will do.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Noted thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are going to adjourn the proceedings.  
There will be no proceedings tomorrow.  If the commission is 
10 
able to make arrangements to bring some witnesses and 
make use of some of the days this week it will announce but 
this whole week has been set aside for the hearing of Mr 
Zuma’s evidence and he is not here – he will not be here the 
rest of the week. 
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS SINE DIE 
 
