 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
26 APRIL 2021 
 
 
DAY 382 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 416 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
26 APRIL 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 3 of 416 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 26 APRIL 2021 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Myburgh, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson as you know today has 
been 
scheduled 
for 
the 
continuation 
of 
Mr 
Gama’s 
evidence.  He last gave evidence I think it was on the 11 
10 
March this year; he is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And ready to take the oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay please administer the oath or 
affirmation.  Good morning Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:  Good morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR GAMA:  Siyabonga Innocent Gama. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
20 
prescribed oath? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 4 of 416 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that all the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God.. 
MR GAMA:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much and thank you for 
coming back Mr Gama to assist the commission and 
availing yourself. 
MR GAMA:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson the documents that are 
of particular relevance to Mr Gama’s evidence are firstly 
and principally Bundle 7 Transnet Bundle 7 Exhibit BB28 
that is Mr Gama’s exhibit and then we will also be referring 
to Bundle 6 that is Exhibit BB27 the Trans – the so called 
Transnet POI Reference Bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay I have got – I have got both of 
them.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Since last … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Gama’s legal representatives are they 
still the same? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes and they are present. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  For the record Mr Gama is 
still represented by the same legal representatives.  Thank 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 5 of 416 
 
you.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson since the last sitting Mr 
Gama has provided us with two additional affidavits.  He – 
one of them is contained towards the end of Exhibit 28 the 
other one was given to us this morning.  We have hard 
copies and at the appropriate time I might ask you to – to 
introduce that into evidence.  We hope maybe at tea times 
that we can formally get it paginated and added to the 
bundle.  So for present purposes I would like simply to add 
Mr Gama’s – an ultimate affidavit.  
10 
 
Mr Gama could I ask you please to turn to page 
250.130.  Chairperson the documentation last time went up 
to page 250.  The pagination of the documents that 
followed are 250.1 and further so not ideal but it was 
caused by the fact that there is another exhibit that starts 
at page 251. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine.  So the page that 
you have asked us to go to now is 200 and? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  250.130. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Are you there Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:  Almost.  Yes I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama there you will find the 
commencement of your affidavit that runs up until page 
250.175 and then includes a series of annexures which run 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 6 of 416 
 
from point 176 all the way to point 257.   
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  I confirm that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If I could take you back please to 
page 250.175 do you confirm that you depose to this 
affidavit? 
MR GAMA:  Yes I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  On the 18 t h of March 2021 and do 
you confirm the truth and accuracy of this affidavit 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 250.175 Mr Myburgh being the last 
page of his affidavit? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the affidavit that starts at page 
250.130? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes and if I could ask you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that correct? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If I could ask you please to enter that 
into evidence Chairperson marked Exhibit BB28.5.13. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Mr Siyabonga Innocent 
Gama that starts at page 250.130 is admitted as an exhibit 
and will be marked as Exhibit BB28.5.13. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson 
subject to your direction we have agreed with our learned 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 7 of 416 
 
friends that the proceedings will commence this morning 
with Mr Gama reading the balance of his initial opening 
statement.  We have looked at that; we have no objection 
to him doing so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You will – you will recall that 
previously… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There was a ruling where he dealt 
with part of it and just the evidence of the witnesses that 
10 
he was going to deal with on that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama had dealt with the first 
five and a half pages of his opening statement.  I assume 
that he would want to pick up there and perhaps I could 
direct your attention please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To page 250.6.  I understand that Mr 
Gama would like to carry on reading into the record his 
opening statement.  From there he did previously deal with 
20 
the evidence of Mr Todd and also the conclusion. 
 
Chairperson Mr Gama has then prepared a further 
opening 
statement 
which 
seems 
to 
me 
to 
deal 
predominately with procedural matters.  He wants to read 
that opening statement after he has dealt with this. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 8 of 416 
 
 
We were provided with their opening statement this 
morning we have got hard copies and perhaps at the 
appropriate time I can hand I up to you and we will then 
find a place for it in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Well the previous one I 
have seen so if there is any new one I would need to see it 
first. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I can then hand it up to you if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  But that one can be dealt with 
later not now is that right? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well I think that subject to your 
direction as I have it and I have just squizzed through it it 
seems to deal with predominantly procedural issues.  Mr 
Gama has certain complaints that he wishes to level 
against the legal team which is of course of right and he 
also appears to take issue Chairperson with the ruling that 
you made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In relation to proceedings on Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  To the best of my knowledge he 
seems to deal with those two things broadly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So we do not have any difficulty – it 
is not a case of someone being implicated or … 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 9 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Anything of the sort.  From the legal 
team’s point of view we would have no difficulty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  With Mr Gama dealing with that 
subject to your direction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well maybe Mr Gama if it is fine with 
you I do not think I would have any difficulty to you 
articulating your concerns but I would like just to read it in 
advance.  Can I give you a chance to deal with this 
10 
sometime during the course of the day?  
MR GAMA:  That is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that be fine?  When I have had a 
look at it.  But the previous one you can deal with it now if 
you would like to read it. 
MR GAMA:  Thank you very much.  Thank you very much 
Chairperson. 
 
As 
you 
know 
I had started 
with my opening 
statement on the 11 t h of March.  It should not be construed 
that I have been reading it since then because then it 
20 
might become the longest opening statement.  I do not 
want to be in (talking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you can go into the relevant books 
of record.   
MR GAMA:  No thank you very much.  I think when we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 10 of 416 
 
dealt with it I had indicated that there were various 
testimonies which were provided by witnesses who have 
sought to implicate me and to highlight some of the more 
glaring discrepancies, inconsistencies and improbabilities 
and falsities I then continue with my statement at page 6 of 
the statement under heading number 8. 
 
I start with the statement of Popo Molefe and his – 
his 
testimony. 
 
From 
Popo 
Molefe’s 
testimony 
the 
commission has learnt how my appointment at Transnet 
allegedly occurred. 
10 
 
According to Molefe my appointment ostensibly 
occurred due to the influence of Gigaba.  This allegation I 
believe 
has 
been 
purposed 
to 
fit 
the 
state 
capture 
narrative. 
 
I would like to explain again that as indicated in my 
affidavit deposed to concerning my history at Transnet I 
have 
worked 
through 
the 
ranks 
and 
was 
ultimately 
appointed as CEO through hard work and dedication and 
not through the influence and hand of Gigaba as Mr Popo 
Molefe would have you to believe. 
20 
 
Mr Gigaba was appointed as the Minister of Public 
Enterprises in 2010.  At that time I had already worked at 
Transnet for more than sixteen years. 
 
The 
Minister 
is 
only 
ever 
involved 
in 
board 
appointments and so it is hard to understand how Popo 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 11 of 416 
 
Molefe could reach the conclusion that Mr Gigaba had a 
hand in my appointment as a CEO at a division of Transnet 
which is below board level. 
 
It must therefore be recorded that this is false. 
 
Popo Molefe admitted in his oral testimony under 
oath that the contents of what he had stated was not within 
his own personal knowledge.  I am dealing there with the 
Transcript of his testimony to the state capture commission 
of the 7 t h of May 2019 at page 6. 
 
So his own viva voce testimony when he first 
10 
appeared at this commission when he was being led by 
Advocate Paul Pretorius he however went to great lengths 
Chair to claim that I was one of three architects of state 
capture at Transnet. 
 
He never defined or explained what an architect of 
state capture is or even worse the facts on which he relied 
for such a startling and I must say false allegation. 
 
The allegation that I am one of three architects of 
state capture has never been even remotely substantiated 
by credible evidence. 
20 
 
On the topics of Regiments, Trillian and Nkonke I 
have been accused of colluding with the aforementioned 
entities.  The truth of the matter is that each of these 
entities contracts were terminated by me during my tenure 
at Transnet. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 12 of 416 
 
 
Such 
terminations 
were 
based 
on 
objective 
evidence placed before me at that time that inter alia 
Transnet’s continued relationship with them would bring 
the reputation of the SOE into disrepute. 
 
Popo Molefe failed to make mention that the 
contracts with Regiments and Trillian were terminated by 
me with the concurrence of the board in October of 2016. 
 
This was approximately nine months before the 
emergence of the now and famous June 2017 Gupta email 
trolls that captivated the country for many months. 
10 
 
Terminating contracts is hardly the conduct of a 
person who is colluding with those said parties.  Popo 
Molefe as non-executive Chairman of Transnet was at 
pains to point out to the media during October 2018 that 
Transnet had terminated my contract due to acts of alleged 
fraud, corruption and misconduct on my part. 
 
In the pleadings with reference to the arbitration 
that I am having with Transnet Popo Molefe denies that 
Transnet terminated my employment due to misconduct. 
 
The aforementioned arbitration proceedings have 
20 
not been commenced. Such a turnaround points to  
a. The personal vendetta or incompetence on the part of 
the board and Popo Molefe or they are dishonest. 
Following my dismissal and in a bid to gather evidence that 
he ought to have collected before dismissing me Popo 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 13 of 416 
 
Molefe hired a retired bishop and offered amnesty to 
managers at Transnet if they came forward and indicted 
that I had asked them to perpetrate a fraud or corruption 
against the company. 
 
Significant 00:15:59 came forward as the notion of 
me being corrupt, its falsity that has been created by Popo 
Molefe and those of his ilk.  
 
Molefe 
in 
his 
affidavit 
explained 
that 
he 
has 
initiated civil litigation against me and others at the South 
Gauteng High Court binding me as a respondent with 
10 
Regiments and Trillian entities whose contracts at Transnet 
I had terminated. 
 
During his oral testimony Popo Molefe created the 
perception that Transnet was struggling financially during 
my tenure with the SOE.  The truth and the facts however 
are very different in that during my last year at the helm of 
Transnet and as evidence by the facts not fiction that has 
routinely reports in our media Transnet remained strong 
financially. 
 
By way of example net profit grew by 75% from 
20 
R2.8 billion into 2017 to R4.9 billion in March 2018 which 
was against an 11.3% improvement in total revenue from 
R65.5 billion to R72.9 billion and an 18% improvement in 
operating profit from R27.6 billion to R32.5 billion. 
 
This 
performance 
indicates 
that 
Transnet 
was 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 14 of 416 
 
financially independent and did not require any subsidy or 
guarantee from the state.   
 
Chairperson have the commission and the South 
African public been misled?  What we have witnessed over 
the past two years at Transnet is extreme sabotage of a 
SOE. 
 
 
The intentions are dubious and as I have pointed 
out before to Popo Molefe the PRASA relation of Transnet 
is afoot and I have given a foot note Chair in terms of what 
I have defined as PRASA relation at Transnet. 
10 
 
I coined the phrase 00:18:22 to refer to the 
phenomenon where Popo Molefe led intensive forensic 
investigations leading to a state of paralysis and lack of 
decision making and whilst the board gives the impression 
of purpose it is an illusion. 
 
The authority of executives is curtailed and the 
board takes decisions that ought to be taken by General 
Managers and the main business suffers as a result 
thereof. 
 
In 2020 we witnessed that net profit at Transnet as 
20 
as at the end of March increased by 34.9% to R3.9 billion.  
While this is still respectable Chair but because it could 
and should have been less however suggests that your 
observers must watch if they will not be a decline leading 
to a real collapse and profitability over the next three 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 15 of 416 
 
years when the impact of 00:19:15 fully sets in. 
 
Between 2016 and 2017 Transnet embarked on a 
process to create a new strategy that insulate it from low 
domestic growth and penetrate new markets whose growth 
was in excess of the state in South African domestic GDP 
growth. 
 
For the year ended March 2018 Transnet announced 
a 75% growth a net profit of R4.9 billion against an 
increase of 11.3% to R72.9 billion driven by strong volume 
growth. 
10 
 
All of the fundamentals tracked positively against 
South African GDP growth of only 0.7%.  These were not 
the results of a struggling company.  Yet in May 2019 Popo 
Molefe informed the commission that the new board had 
vetted a financial collapse of the company.  
 
A News 24 report by Lameez Omarjee on the 7 t h of 
May 2019 which I have captured.  It captures succinctly the 
false statement that was provided to the commission. 
 
The evidence Chair as I have exhibited is different.  
I quote he says: 
20 
“It was a just a matter of time before 
Transnet became Eskom not that we like 
where Eskom is it is serious, it is in serious 
trouble and because of that the country is 
in trouble.” 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 16 of 416 
 
 
He then also went on to say that when the new 
board took over in 2018 Transnet had been on the verge of 
collapse.  This is not a correct analysis of Transnet 
00:20:53.  It was dramatized; it was sensationalised to 
drum up support with the allegations of illegal activity that 
was being visited upon people such as myself and other 
experienced 
executives 
who 
were 
being 
purged 
at 
Transnet. 
 
I have already Chair dealt with the testimony of 
Todd so I am going to skip that and then go to Revenue 
10 
Management and Cost Containment Strategy. 
 
I then deal with the issues of Nkonki.  When Nkonki 
was hired some of the key projects they were tasked to 
look at were revenue contracts especially in the coal line 
and the iron ore line. 
 
This is an area of Transnet’s responsibility where 
established companies dominate the allocation of rail and 
port capacity to the detriment of emerging miners. 
 
By way of example the most significant of these 
contracts is the Kumba Contract which is for the haulage of 
20 
iron ore from Sishen to Saldanha.  This evergreen contract 
arose Chair arose hastily out of the desire to eliminate an 
embedded derivative which arose from an 00:22:11 base 
pricing regime on the contract which was entered into in 
the late ‘70’s. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 17 of 416 
 
 
Transnet therefore in 2005 had entered into a new 
23 year contract that would expire in 2028.  It rates that I 
even the lowest in the world per ton kilometre.  The amount 
to less than 1 US cent per ton per kilometre or 12.8 South 
African cents per ton per kilometre to haul iron ore for 
Kumba from Sishen to Saldanha. 
 
So for the 861 kilometre trip Kumani pays R111.00 
per ton per while Assmang which is its competitor is 
charged at a rate of 17.3 cents per ton for the same iron 
ore production from the Kumani mine in the Northern Cape 
10 
which amounts to R140 per ton. 
 
This represents a difference of R38 for every ton 
haul demonstrating a tariff that will not pass muster with 
our competition laws. 
 
So in 2013 Kumba had initially agreed that its rate 
needed 
to 
be 
normalised 
in 
line 
with 
Assmang 
in 
accordance with fair business practices. 
 
However in negotiations that we had restarted in 
2018 it reported Transnet and its management under my 
leadership to Minister Pravin Gordhan who attempting to 
20 
level the playing fields with Assmang and trying to get out 
of an anti-competitive contract. To this day Kumba pays 
Transnet approximately R1 billion less per annum than 
what they ought to pay had its tariff been normalised in 
line with Assmang tariff which was normalised in 2013. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 18 of 416 
 
 
These 
anti-competitive 
behaviour 
in 
the 
super 
profits being earned by Kumba is said to be condoned until 
2028.  So any Transnet official who seeks to normalise this 
earns the wrath of the Anglo American PLC owned Kumba 
resources.   
 
All efforts to renegotiate these tariffs are stone 
walled by Kumba.  These are the environment where 
Kumba earns in excess of R20 billion net profit per annum 
at the expense of a state owned entity and to the detriment 
of the 00:24:14 of iron ore in the country. 
10 
 
As an example Kumba earnings before interest, tax 
depreciation and amortisation for the year ended 31 
December 2020 increased to a rogue – record R45.8 billion 
resulting in an 00:24:32 margin of 57% against 52% the 
previous year which is a remarkable feat indeed. 
 
Chairperson this is the real state capture.  The 
Transnet Kumba agreement is under competitive and 
exclusionary in that Anglo Kumba has captured the rail and 
port capacity on the iron ore line and kept out black junior 
iron ore miners.  In fact all black iron ore miners sell their 
20 
iron ore to Kumba because they have no rail and port 
capacity all of which has been allocated to those who were 
in mining prior to 1994 even though mining licences have 
been issued in the rich iron ore area of the Northern Cape 
the miners do not have allocation to export manganese or 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 19 of 416 
 
iron ore in their own names. 
 
So if we then move on to point number 10.  A new 
board was appointed at Transnet in May 2018.  Its first 
order of business Chairperson in June 2018 was to accuse 
the Group Chief Executive of presiding over maleficence at 
Transnet.   
 
My 
attempts 
to 
induct 
the 
board 
to 
Transnet 
processes, control systems, strategy and challenges and to 
arm the board members with the necessary information to 
inform them even to educate them and to allay the 
10 
allegations were met with huge resistance. 
 
They were armed with no operational knowledge or 
adequate expertise of the company they directed.  Then 
they set out to achieve their mandate of routing out 
corruption at Transnet by removing by way of nothing less 
than a purge the entire top layer of executive management 
starting with the Group Chief Executive in 2018. 
 
They also failed to appreciate the strategy of 
Transnet who sought to enhance the market demands 
strategy and future proof Transnet’s existence instead they 
20 
abandoned 
and 
dismantled 
it 
without 
attempting 
to 
understand it. 
 
The board completed its mandate of management 
upheavals in June 2020.  The result is that the corporate 
memory at Transnet has been completely erased.  With 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 20 of 416 
 
every executive with long tenure having been falsely 
accused, charged or exited in an attempt to bring sweeping 
changes by what I believe is an ill equipped board. 
 
The pressurisation of Transnet is complete and all 
that South Africa needs to do is to follow very closely 
Transnet’s future financial and operational performance 
observe its decline and the erosion of its contribution to 
the development of state. 
 
So the real collapse Chairperson of Transnet has 
not yet happened it is just ahead of us. 
10 
 
In the same submission much was made about the 
recovery of R618 million from China South Rail.  The 
interphase being that this amount was improperly paid to 
CSR and to the new board’s credit look at what is achieved 
– this is false and misleading. 
 
The facts are that R618 million had been paid to 
CSR against an advance payment guarantee by CSR 
issued by a AAA rated bank.  The money had been paid on 
the advice of international company Pricewater House 
Coopers; it was legitimate and was intended for spares and 
20 
tools preparing for locomotives that had been supplied 
since 2015. 
 
This was for the MSA contract which was due to be 
replaced by a new MRS contract.  This so called refund 
has now resulted in many locomotives being parked in the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 21 of 416 
 
system and prejudiced to saying the efficiency of the 
railway system.  
 
You may have read in recent newspaper reports I 
just saw in the last month Transnet releasing a statement 
to confirm that the coal industry indicated that it was 
dealing with and experiencing operational problems within 
Transnet.  The chrome industry has followed suite.  The 
container industry the same.   
 
The 
operational 
problems 
are 
self-inflicted 
Chairperson and they result from not having timeously put 
10 
in place a maintenance reliability system with the OEM’s to 
have adequate spares and tools because the warranty 
period for the locomotives that were supplied to the coal 
line in 2015.   
 
The locomotives are standing idle because there is 
no maintenance contract in place. The contract was 
cancelled by the Popo Molefe led board so that they could 
come and announce that they have recovered R618 million.  
This was done by persons who simply cannot begin to 
understand the highly complex network and sophisticated 
20 
international 
business 
which 
at 
any 
given 
time 
has 
enumerable moving parts. 
 
Chairperson there were others such as Mohammady, 
Calllard and Witness number 2 who have been set up to 
support or compliment the narrative of alleged corruption 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 22 of 416 
 
levelled against me at this commission. 
 
I deny Chair in the strongest terms they are 
false accusations.  I deal with these allegations by pointing 
out the many falsities in their statements in my affidavit.  
They all have ulterior motive and are driven by the 
principles to achieve a particular objective.  Briefly, I deal 
with Francis Callard’s testimony.  Callard was involved in 
the 
investment 
case 
of 
the 
locomotive 
and 
was 
subsequently appointed by MNS at the suggestion of the 
Audit 
Committee 
Chairman 
to 
assist 
MNS 
in 
the 
10 
investigation. 
 
Callard’s testimony to the Commission seems to 
be that of a man who felt compelled to describe all other 
people as being guilty of some offence or process step 
whilst downplaying his own involvement in matters which 
should have been scrutinised.  While Callard seem to have 
most information available he was quite selective about the 
information he shared with the Commission and in most 
instances share many useless items of information. 
 
Over and above that, his testimony is full 
20 
innuendo conjecture and speculation.  Many inferences he 
draws are not supported by fact but by his own rich and 
fertile speculative mind.  It seems that Callard use his 
appearance at his Commission as a bid to supplement 
income.  He currently has a claim of over R 4 million at 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 23 of 416 
 
Transnet/MNS he claims that he did for them.   
 
Callard also seeks to downplay his involvement 
in many issues and in many issues, Chair, where he claims 
lack of knowledge, I say he knows much more than he led 
on.  However, he also tries to hold himself to be an expert 
in all things especially financial matters which he is not.   
 
When it comes to Mohammed, his testimony and 
his statement.  Mohammed, he tried very hard to support 
Pop Molefe but attempts to downplayed to evidence led so 
that he appears to create the illusion of an objective 
10 
witness.  He distanced himself from events that he was 
intimately involved him so that he can minimise his role. 
 
Mohammed, he was also not a credible witness 
before the Commission.  I raise this issue as a lot has 
been said to you without any evidence.  During my 
testimony today I will provide the Commission with factual 
evidence when I make statements. 
 
Evidence based testimonies are important to 
bring the truth to the foreground.  Any of the assertions 
that are aided state capture are false and are a cunning 
20 
calculation which has been carefully crafted to mislead the 
Commission 
and 
so 
deflect 
accountability 
and 
responsibility. 
 
Again, I will inform the Commission through my 
evidence in order to reflect the true story.  Witness number 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 24 of 416 
 
2 seeks to accuse me of laundering money on behalf of the 
Guptas.  This is false Chair.  Unfortunately, I was not able 
to comment more on the statement as I have not been 
favoured with the full copy of my diary but I have dealt with 
aspects of it which we can deal with it later on today. 
 
I have also requested through my legal team 
copies of mappings of my own vehicle and my cell phone in 
order to assist me in determining where I was at relevant 
times as to provide a proper answer. 
 
Chairperson, I am delighted that we have an 
10 
opportunity to address you on the matters that have been 
brought to the attention of the Commission and I know that 
you will distil the truth state of affairs from the falsities 
advanced before you. 
 
I believe, Chair, that you are endowed with a 
desire to determine truth and to remove injustice.  That you 
will be fair to all of us who have appeared before you and 
more so that those who have been unjustly accused who 
have been identified and defined as enemies worth to be 
tainted and defamed without providing the Commission with 
20 
actual evidence, finally have an opportunity to provide to 
you an honest version of events. 
 
I thank you very much, Chair.  We are now in 
prelude number 2 of my opening statement.  The final one, 
we will deal with it.  It is much shorter than this, once you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 25 of 416 
 
have had the opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you, Mr Gama.  Well, one, 
what you have just finished reading is – those parts of your 
opening statement which you were – you did not read last 
time. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is one opening statement.  Now the 
significance 
why 
I 
want 
to 
emphasise 
that. 
 
The 
significance is that I have just noticed that the other one 
that was handed up to me that we talked about earlier, the 
10 
opening statement, that was handed up to me this morning 
is marked Second Opening Statement. 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
 
Or 
find 
the 
remarks 
...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  So I know that earlier on 
without reading it and without having had time to look at it, 
I said you could deal with it later but now what is – has 
crossed my mind is.  I may be starting a wrong precedent if 
I start allowing second or first opening statements.  There 
may be third opening statements and they all take time.  
20 
So, but to the extent that that statement might be dealing 
with Friday.  Is it Friday, the 30 t h? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that you might be wishing 
to raise concerns about what will happen on Friday, I would 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 26 of 416 
 
imagine that that could be articulated maybe on Friday.  
There is nothing wrong with articulating concerns about 
what will happen on Friday, labelling that as an opening 
statement might be a wrong label.  It might just be 
articulating those concerns.   
 
So in principle that is one thing.  But allowing a 
second opening statement might be problematic.  But 
maybe we can – you can reflect on that and sometime 
during the day we can see what we can do.  I have – I 
think my eye did land on some sentence here that suggests 
10 
what your intentions are about Friday.  
 
I just want to say, to affirm that I want to hear all 
perspectives.  And I want to hear as many people as 
possible particularly people against whom allegations of 
wrongdoing have been made.  But of course, we operate 
within certain time constraints.  The only thing that has 
crossed my mind a few minutes ago is that with regard to 
Friday another option might because in terms of time it is 
difficult.  It is just difficult.   
 
We have for this evening the application – 
20 
Mr Gigaba’s 
application 
in 
relation 
to 
Ms 
Magma’s 
evidence 
and 
depending 
on 
the 
outcome 
of 
that 
application, 
we 
should 
or 
could 
have 
Ms 
Magma’s 
evidence.  If the Legal Team could consider whether there 
is a possibility that Ms Ngoma and Mr Gigaba are available 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 27 of 416 
 
on Friday morning and if they are available on Friday 
morning, we could consider proceeding with your evidence 
into the evening which could then enable us not to lose any 
time because then we could right into the evening with you 
which is the time we would have taken on Friday morning 
and maybe even more. 
 
So that if we do not finish then on Friday 
morning, I could hear Mr Gigaba’s application and maybe 
Ms Magma’s evidence and then hear you in the afternoon.  
But that would depend on how the Legal Team is with that 
10 
too.  I think Ms Ngoma has been issued with a summons 
for this evening and that would depend on whether – on 
their availability.   
 
So, but that is the only thing I could think of but 
if that does not work, I cannot see any other way of dealing 
with the situation.  But I would allow you in due course 
preferable on Friday if we still have to proceed in that way 
to make the remarks you want to make about that point.  
You understand? 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  Chairperson, all I am requesting is 
20 
accommodation on this matter and if you accommodate me, 
as you are suggesting, there is not even a need for me to 
address aspects of what I believe could be constitutional 
rights, you know, being infringed with.  So if I could then 
just deal with the issue of the Legal Team only. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 28 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   So, all of us have to be accommodated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I understand. 
MR GAMA:   ...accommodation that I am not getting from 
the Commission.  That is a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, I understand that.  All I would 
like to – understand is that there are logistical and 
practical difficulties.  Not like one does not want to, you 
know, just practical.  Mr Myburgh, I do not know whether 
you wish to say anything about what crossed my mind? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I have two other possible proposals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Maybe my learned friend and I can 
address you in chambers on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There is – as you know, Mr Molefe is 
set up presently for Thursday evening.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I am quite sure that he may be – 
might be easier to move him than to move Mr and Ms 
20 
Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The other thing which we could 
discuss with you, DCJ, is how deep we could go into the 
evening on Friday. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 29 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we cannot go too deep on Friday.  In 
fact, we cannot go into the evening at all Friday and that is 
one of the problems.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Perhaps 
at 
teatime 
I 
can 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because...  So what it amounts to.  I 
mean, generally speaking, one, between one and two is 
lunch time. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if Mr Gama’s counsel becomes 
available at one, it means, generally speaking, starting at 
two. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And we cannot go beyond four.  So it 
means just two hours.  Actually, I have been considering 
whether on Friday if I should not ask you to talk to 
Mr Gama’s legal team with the view to starting earlier.  
That was even before I thought, you know, that they 
20 
wanted us to start at one.  So, but maybe during the tea 
break ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you and Mr Gama’s counsel can 
approach me.  But let us take it from there. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 30 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Good morning, Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   Good morning, Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   On the 11 t h of March, we have dealt 
with certain introductory issues, we have dealt with 
Mr Segang, 
your 
MBA. 
 
We 
have 
dealt 
with 
your 
reinstatement.  We have dealt with the issue of GMS and 
Abelose and certain auxiliary issues.   
 
I just want to before going forward to other 
10 
topics, just ask you a few questions that relate to the 
things that we have dealt with, broadly, already.  In relation 
to your relationships or your visits to the Saxonwold 
compound of the Guptas.  Were you invited to the Gupta 
wedding? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was held, as we have it, on the 
1 s t of May 2013. 
MR GAMA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the answer no? 
20 
MR GAMA:   No.  Sorry.  Am I too far from the mic? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you were, ja. 
MR GAMA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You were not invited? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 31 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then if I can take you, please, in 
relation to the evidence you gave about Mr Essa.  Could I 
ask you to turn to page 52 of Exhibit BB-28, Bundle 7? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will recall that you were asked 
in the 10.6 about the trip, a Dubai trip in January 2016.  I 
just want to pick up, if I may, at paragraph 32.5.  This is at 
page 52.  Are you there? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say: 
10 
“I did not undertake a trip to Dubai during the 
period 18 to 24 January. 
I travelled to Davos, Switzerland via Dubai on 
17 
January 
2016 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
presenting logistics and infrastructure related 
papers at the World Economic Forum as part 
of the South African Government and Business 
Delegation which attended for the purposes of 
promoting South Africa’s interest. 
During the evening of 22 January, I stopped 
20 
over in Dubai upon my return from Davos. 
After 
one 
day’s 
stay, 
I 
departed 
for 
Johannesburg 
on 
the 
morning 
of 
24 January 2016...” 
 
Paragraph 36.2.1: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 32 of 416 
 
“I arrived at and checked-in at the Oberoi 
Hotel in Dubai on Friday, 22 January at 
approximately midnight and I checked out of 
the hotel on 24 January 2016 at approximately 
at 08:30...” 
 
So you would have checked out on the Sunday, if 
I have it correctly.  Is that right? 
MR GAMA:   I do not know the date but it was the 
24 t h of January. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see that if Friday was the 22 n d, 
10 
then I assume ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Okay.  Oh, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...the 24 t h was the Sunday. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, yes, ja.  It must be Sunday. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So as I have it, you would have 
stayed at the Oberoi Hotel then for two nights, the Friday 
and Saturday night. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The next subparagraph: 
“Whilst in Dubai, I had a brief meeting with 
20 
Essa during the late afternoon on Saturday, 
23 January 2016 which meeting took place at 
my hotel. 
Essa had arranged the hotel booking on my 
behalf 
albeit 
that 
I 
paid 
for 
my 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 33 of 416 
 
accommodation...” 
 
You say in the next subparagraph: 
“Our discussions were, for the most part, 
entered on information sharing concerning his 
vision 
to 
create 
a 
majority 
black 
owned 
management consultancy, the details of which 
he undertook to share with me as his plans 
developed into something more constructive...” 
 
And then you go on to say: 
“At no stage did I meet any other people...” 
10 
 
Can I just ask you?  How did your meeting with 
Mr Essa come about? 
MR GAMA:   It came about because I was stopping over in 
Dubai.  I think he must have called me.  I cannot remember 
whether he knew or that I was stopping over in Dubai but 
he must have called me because I intended to stop over in 
Dubai and then he called me to say:  Okay, if I stop over, it 
is fine.   
 
I think my biggest problem when I wanted to stop 
over there was that my office was still arranging for hotel 
20 
accommodation because I had found that when I was in 
Davos, what we intended to do I could not do it there.  And 
then I thought that Dubai was actually the best place 
because it is in the middle of the world.  Davos is more of 
a small town.  I needed to buy a dress for a matric dance 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 34 of 416 
 
for my daughter.  So I thought Dubai would be the best 
place to do it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And she would be very happy.  I am sure 
that you got it outside of the country. 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you say he phoned you? 
MR GAMA:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Essa phoned you? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how did it come about then that 
Mr Essa arranged your hotel booking? 
MR GAMA:   I think in the course of my discussion, I had 
said to him:  Look, I was not going to stop over for a long 
time in Dubai but because I did not have the hotel booking, 
I would not be able to stop over.  And I think that is when 
he suggested that no he will book me into a hotel in Dubai 
itself.  And that is how I got to get to this place called 
Oberoi Hotel.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you stay there before? 
20 
MR GAMA:   No, I never stayed there before. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Did you ever stayed there 
afterwards? 
MR GAMA:   No, I had never.  I only went there once. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you say your discussion, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 35 of 416 
 
for 
the 
most 
part, 
centred 
on 
information 
sharing 
concerning his vision to create a majority black owned 
management consultancy.  Can you expand on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  I think from what he was indicating and I 
think that is where it truly and eventually came from, as I 
understood it later, was that he wanted to create a majority 
black owned management consultancy because most of the 
consulting houses that we have are largely international 
houses that are not owned by South African entities and 
his desire was that South Africa wanted to create a 
10 
majority black owned management consultancy of which he 
thought that if he were able to collect people from different 
consultancies who were black they would then create that 
kind of capacity to take on large consultancy assignments 
in the South African corporate space. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So was he talking about Trillian? 
MR GAMA:   I suspect that the – what do you call it – the 
evolution from Regiments to Trillian, I think I must have 
heard at some point that he may have been behind that 
Trillian as an owner but I do not really have any facts to 
20 
adduce in terms of that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But did you discuss Trillian and 
Regiments? 
MR GAMA:   He did not have a name.  Remember, he was 
from Regiments.  So, and he was talking about this 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 36 of 416 
 
evolution that he wanted to created this large black owned 
management consultancy. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you did not discuss by name 
Trillian and Regiments? 
MR GAMA:   No, no not by name.  Not by name. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   By this time, did you know that 
Mr Essa was involved with Trillian? 
MR GAMA:   No, I did not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When did you come to learn of that? 
MR GAMA:   At some point, I think towards the end of 
10 
2016.  Somebody, I think, in our Risk Department said to 
me:  Look, we suspect that Mr Essa owns the majority of 
Trillian but it was a suspicion.  I do not think he had the – I 
do not think she had the actual information.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, we ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   She had heard it through certain people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, can I – I did not get the 
date.  What date did you say? 
MR GAMA:   I think it was around 2016.  It was really 
around the time that we were now considering terminating 
20 
the contract between Regiments and Trillian.  It must have 
been around September/October 2016. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry?  September ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   September ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   September 2016. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 37 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   October 2016, thereabouts.  There was that 
suspicion from some of our Risk people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So just so that I can understand the 
context and I only have, really, one or two more questions.  
Just so that I understand this.  Was Mr Essa suggesting 
that 
you 
should 
join 
this 
black 
owned 
management 
consultancy or was Mr Essa feeding you out as to if this 
consultancy was established would Transnet give it work or 
what exactly was the object of this meeting? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, the object of the meeting is the latter 
10 
where he was saying incorporates such as Transnet.  
Would they be looking at majority black owned, black 
owned management consultancy with expertise, which 
would then alleviate the need to use multi-national or 
international entities that were probably domiciled in South 
Africa but registered elsewhere.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what was your response to that? 
MR GAMA:   Well, he had undertaken to share with me his 
vision at a later date in terms of what is it that would 
transpire.  So he did not – I think it was a concept.  It was 
20 
conceptual at the time when we were discussing it.  He was 
sounding me out whether we would be, you know, we would 
as Transnet look at such a consultancy going forward.  So I 
had said to him when he has shaped his thoughts and his 
thinking around it he could come back to me.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 38 of 416 
 
 
But I also, I think, mentioned at the time that I 
did not really like having consultants as a general rule.  In 
fact, by the time I had left Transnet I had established an 
internal consulting capability which I believe still exist to 
this day because it was precisely for the reason that we 
had relied too much on and paid too much money to 
consultants, external consultants. I wanted us to really just 
bring in consultants for the – for short periods for 
capabilities and information that we did not have of which 
was specialised.   
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, correct me if I am wrong, but by 
January 2016, Transnet had already done some business 
with Trillian, had it not? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I think so.  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And we will come later but that 
relates inter alia to the club loan.  Correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And there we know that payments 
were made or a payment was made by – to Trillian in 
December of 2015.  Correct? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So with no mentioned made at this 
meeting 
of 
work 
that 
Trillian 
had 
already 
done 
for 
Transnet? 
MR GAMA:   No, no, no.  There was no mention.  The 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 39 of 416 
 
predominant entity that had done some work at Transnet in 
that year or the years before was Regiments.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And could I take you then, 
please, back to page 48?  And perhaps I could just ask you 
to have a look at your paragraph 31.3.  I do not want to 
rehash this but I just want to put to you the evidence that 
Mr Singh gave in response to this paragraph, so to refresh 
your memory.  This paragraph refers to the fact that you 
saw Mr Singh and Mr Essa together in Mr Singh’s office in 
July or August 2015.   
10 
 
Mr Essa then indicated that he would like to 
have a meeting with you and you said that he could get 
your contact details from Mr Singh.  And this, essentially 
Mr Gama, you will recall the background how you came to 
visit the Saxonwold residence.  Do you recall that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is not true, to put to you.  
Mr Singh says that this never happened and that it simply 
– you have made it up as a convenience, as he puts it, to 
explain how it is that you came to go to the Saxonwold 
20 
residence. 
MR GAMA:   [laughs] No, no Chair.  There is no 
convenience or anything to do with Saxonwold in relation 
to this meeting.  I met Mr Essa at Singh’s office and I 
asked him to give – I asked Sing to give Essa my number 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 40 of 416 
 
so that he could call me because he said that he wanted to 
have a meeting with me.  So that was the long and short of 
it.  So you never gave Mr Essa your number, he got it from 
Mr Singh, correct?  Ja.  And he subsequently called you, 
correct?  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Singh made the point 
that it could not have been in August because you will see 
your introduction at 31.3 says: 
“In or during July/August…” 
He says it could not have been in August because in 
10 
August he had been seconded to Eskom. 
MR GAMA:   As I have said, I do not know the exact dates 
that is why I said either July/August.  So if he says it could 
not have been August, that is fine, and if he had already 
gone to Eskom at that time then it means it was July. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then it means it must have been in 
July? 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So just to end off in relation to Mr 
Essa.  As I understand your evidence, Mr Gama, and 
20 
please correct me if I am wrong, you are saying that you 
met Mr Essa four times.  The first in 2015 as part of we 
might call a Regiments’ meeting …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Myburgh, before you go 
away from this particular meeting, I just want to make sure, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 41 of 416 
 
Mr Gama, that in regard to this meeting of Mr Salim Essa 
and Mr Singh where you saw Mr Essa in Mr Singh’s office 
and you came to him, Mr Singh, are you saying you cannot 
be mistaken about that?  You know it happened? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, no, I cannot be mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  And would you have any reason 
to falsely implicate Mr Singh in having a meeting with Mr 
Salim Essa in his office? 
MR GAMA:   No, Chair, why would I?  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said it is not convenience, there 
10 
is no convenience. 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not see what kind of convenience 
would that be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because he was categorical that it did 
not happen.  Ja, okay. 
MR GAMA:   I did not go to that meeting because of Mr 
Singh it was because Mr Essa called me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR GAMA:   It has got nothing to do with Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, you mean the meeting at 
20 
Saxonwold? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  So, Mr Gama, I just 
wanted to make sure that I have this correct, your evidence 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 42 of 416 
 
is that you met Mr Essa four times.  The first time as part 
of this Regiments’ contingent which you deal with, this is 
during 2015, you deal with that at paragraph 31.2.1.  The 
second time then in Mr Singh’s office you now say that in 
July of 2015 then in Dubai in January of 2016 and as I 
recall, you say you saw him on one other occasion casually 
in a restaurant.  Is that an accurate summary of your 
evidence? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then in relation to the things we 
10 
dealt with last time, I just wanted to put to you - and an 
affidavit will need to be produced to this effect but we 
asked 
Transnet 
to 
search 
for 
your 
payment 
of 
the 
Eversheds’ cost bill of about a million rand. 
MR GAMA:   Over the…? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Of the Eversheds’ costs bill. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Remember you say that you paid it 
in December of 2009.  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Transnet has not been able to find 
any proof of that.  Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, the difficulty I think that I have is that my 
bank could only go back 10 years, that is really the only 
difficulty that I have but I am aware that I paid it.  In fact I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 43 of 416 
 
sold shares in order for me to be able to pay.  The 
difficulty is that the bank has indicated that they can only 
go back 10 years so it falls outside, I think it is on year 11 
or 12 now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The settlement agreement itself I 
take it you would agree does not say anything about you 
being reimbursed for amounts already paid. 
MR GAMA:   You want to me to respond on – I think 
develop it, I am listening.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the settlement agreement you are 
10 
talking about, Mr…? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want him to comment on the 
proposition that the settlement agreement does not say 
anything about him being paid back pay?  I think it might 
not say that but it does say reinstatement, I think 
retrospectively if I am not mistaken. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, well the provision says that 
Transnet will make a contribution equivalent to 75% of Mr 
Gama’s taxed legal costs. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, just bring the mic closer, Mr 
Myburgh? 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
It 
says 
Transnet 
will 
make 
a 
contribution equivalent to 75% of Mr Gama’s taxed legal 
costs incurred during Mr Gama’s High Court application 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 44 of 416 
 
and in respect of his unfair dismissal dispute referred to 
the bargaining council.  I am simply putting …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is about costs that you are talking 
about? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not – oh, I thought it was about back 
pay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In other words, I am simply saying 
10 
that the settlement agreement does not talk about Mr Gama 
being reimbursed amounts that have already been paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is really the only point I am 
putting, Mr Gama, if you want to comment on that? 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
 
The 
settlement 
agreement 
talks 
to 
…[intervenes] 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:   Mr Chairman… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry? 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:   I think it is only fair to Mr Gama 
20 
that he present it – is it now for Mr Myburgh to even look 
at the document?  What about Mr Gama, he should have 
sight of this document, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you want him to refer Mr Gama to 
the settlement agreement? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 45 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I have got no difficulty with that at 
all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama – Chairperson, for some 
reason the files are always behind the witness, today I see 
that they were file boxes on the floor but seemingly have 
not been brought from storage.  I do apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to keep the question until 
later and proceed with other questions? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I think I am going to need to. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and then when the files maybe after 
tea break be here then you can go back to it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then just on this issue of costs.  
As I understand your evidence, you accept that you did not 
pay the Bowmans’ account or you cannot remember having 
paid it, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   You mean from my personal account? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   No, I think at that time I have not paid it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then I just want to put to you 
20 
that when Mr Mkwanazi and Mr Mapoma were asked how 
you came to be paid 75% of Transnet’s costs, they were 
both at a loss for an explanation.  Neither of them said 
well, we were paying Mr Gama to reimburse him. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  Chair, sorry, that is not correct.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 46 of 416 
 
The evidence of those two witnesses just named by Mr 
Myburgh is very clear, their interpretation …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, please speak up a bit? 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  They were involved – those two 
persons, Mr Mkwanazi and Mr Mapoma were involved in the 
process, unlike Mr Molefe.  It is clear what their evidence 
was in relation to the repayment to Mr Gama of those fees.  
It is not correct to say that they were at loss, they were 
part and parcel of that negotiation process so they had 
firsthand knowledge of what had transpired.  I think it is 
10 
important to put that to Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the question relates to their 
response when they were questioned here, irrespective of 
what they knew.  The question relates to how they 
responded when they were questioned. 
MR GAMA:   Now I recall that that was the response that I 
have just placed on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it is not how I recall the 
evidence but I think it can perhaps be something dealt with 
20 
in argument. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will remember that both of them 
were taxed about how is it possible that you landed up 
paying Mr Gama 75% of Transnet’s legal fees? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 47 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I remember that, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And to the best of my recollection 
they did not know, that seemed to be something of an 
anomaly for them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And also – if you could bear with me 
for  a moment?  Yes… 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is certainly – my recollection is 
that they certainly had difficulty justifying it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  What they certainly did not do, 
10 
to the best of my recollection is to say this was aimed at 
reimbursing Mr Gama for monies that he had already paid 
because that is something – and I am not criticising Mr 
Gama, that is something that we heard about for the first 
time when Mr Gama gave his evidence, that is my 
recollection.  So, Mr Gama, when we get the files I will 
then take you to this single paragraph. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  Maybe, Chair, just – is it really just a 
principle issue, the principle was that I would be paid 75% 
of the tax bill of [indistinct – dropping voice].  There was 
20 
no discussion or a clause in the actually settlement 
agreement that talked about okay, the fact that it must be 
reimbursed, you just had to present the bill and show what 
the bill was so whether I had already paid for it or not, the 
issue was that that was the agreement and that I should be 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 48 of 416 
 
paid that 75%.  So, I mean, the issue about the fact that 
some of it was reimbursement – remember, when you have 
a legal case you are paying all the time.  By the time we 
had the settlement I had paid close to 5 million of legal 
costs.  So I had been paying, it was not as if – I think the 
only one that I have not paid was the Bowmans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  And then, as I recall 
your evidence dealing with the MBA, I just wanted to go 
back to one thing.  As I understand, Mr Gama, you must 
10 
correct me if I am wrong, you say that your [indistinct], that 
the 
university 
conducted 
an 
investigation 
when 
the 
allegations about Mr Sagar came to light, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I asked you whether you be 
prepared to share those documents with us, it probably is 
my fault, for not having followed up on that, are you still 
prepared to share those documents with us? 
MR GAMA:   I have shared those documents with the 
Commission. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Have you? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Maybe 
we 
should 
take 
the 
tea 
adjournment now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you, Chairperson, we can 
get out the files. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 49 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  It is twenty five past eleven, we 
will resume at twenty to twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Gama, 
as I understand it, the files have now been retrieved from 
the store.  Could I ask you please to go to Transnet bundle 
3, that is EXHIBIT 16 and 17, Mapoma and Todd.  I would 
like you to go to 16 and if I could ask you please to turn up 
10 
page 19.  I am just going to show you the provision in the 
settlement agreement. 
MR GAMA:   19? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   19.  So the relevant clause is clause 
3.5, which I read to you.  I was requested to show you it in 
writing.  There it is: 
“Transnet will make a contribution equivalent to 
75% of Mr Gama’s taxed legal costs incurred.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I missed the page, Mr 
Myburgh. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 19, one nine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ON bundle 7? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, bundle 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bundle 3. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   EXHIBIT 16.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 50 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think my registrar is not hearing you.  I 
do not have bundle 3.  Bundle 3B? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Bundle 3, EXHIBIT 16. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  It is only – it is bundle 3, there is 
no A or B? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So paragraph 3 or clause 3.5: 
““Transnet will make a contribution equivalent to 
75% of Mr Gama’s taxed legal costs incurred during 
10 
Mr Gama’s High Court application and in respect of 
his unfair dismissal dispute referred to the Transnet 
bargaining council.” 
Is there anything that you want to add to what you have 
already testified to? 
MR GAMA:   No, I think it reads as it reads.  I think, as I 
have said, it was 75% of the legal costs at the High Court 
as well as the labour dispute. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Now, Mr Gama, could I ask 
you please to go back to page – bundle 7, page 22, your 
20 
first affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   Bundle 22? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Bundle 7.  I just want to – I have not 
led you with reference to each particular paragraph but you 
will see at page 24 you start this affidavit by: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 51 of 416 
 
“Setting out the background to my employment with 
Transnet.” 
A number of these issues you have touched on and they 
also – some of them are dealt with in your opening 
statement.  Is there anything that you wish to highlight 
under that heading pages 24, 25 all the way through to 29? 
MR GAMA:   Highlight as in emphasise? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, is there anything that you feel 
you would like to deal with at this stage?  Of course my 
learned friend is more than entitled to re-examine you and 
10 
to take you to anything that he feels has been left out but 
for present purposes is there anything that you wish to 
deal with that has not been dealt with?    
MR GAMA:   No, I think in the interest of time... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  And then at page 29 you deal 
with Mr Mapoma’s statement and that is, we know, relates 
to your reinstatement and costs.  That goes all the way to 
page 35.  Anything you want to deal with there? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at page 36 you deal with 
20 
the evidence of Mr Todd and you deal with his affidavit 
dated the 31 July which deals with your reinstatement and 
then at page 40 you deal with what is referred to as his 
second affidavit and that relates more to the GNS issues 
and that runs through to the end of page 46.  Those are 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 52 of 416 
 
things that we canvassed last time, is there anything you 
would like to add to that? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at the foot of page 46 you 
have a heading In General and you then deal with 
paragraph 
29, 
any 
political 
interference, 
those 
are 
paragraphs in the 10.6, 30 that deals with costs, 31 deals 
with your visits to – or your single visit to the Saxonwold 
compound and that then runs on to the end of page 30.  Is 
there anything you want to add to that? 
10 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you deal with overseas 
travel at the foot of page 50.  The only trip that we have 
deal with and that we have questioned you about is the 
January 2016 trip which you deal with – and we dealt with 
this morning at paragraph 32.5 and further.  We went 
through that this morning. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is there anything you want to add to 
that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then page 53, at the foot of the 
page, the basis for the three payments of legal costs, I 
think we’ve traversed most of that.  That then takes you to 
the heading:  Request for Outstanding Documents.  Is 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 53 of 416 
 
there anything you want to add in relation to the basis of 
prepayments of legal(?). 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I could then take you please – 
those assisting me have managed to have placed in the file 
your latest affidavit, the one you gave us this morning 
dealing with witness two.  Could I ask you please to go to 
page 262?  So it’s 250.262, right towards the end of bundle 
7. 
MR GAMA:   250 point? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Point 262, you will find it, Mr Gama, 
the last sort of 20 pages or so. 
MR GAMA:   262. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 250.262? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250.262, yes, Chairperson.  Are you 
there, Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   There you find an affidavit, it starts 
at 262, it runs to 269 and it includes I think it is four 
annexures SG1 through to SG4 running from point 270 to 
20 
point 297.  Do you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I could ask you then to turn page 
to page 250.269, the signature page and although the date 
is not filled in there it would appear from the police stamps 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 54 of 416 
 
and I would just ask you to confirm this, that you appear to 
have deposed to this affidavit on the 26 April 2021, 
presumably earlier this morning. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do you confirm the truth and 
accuracy of this affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, might I ask you then to 
enter into evidence Mr Gama’s affidavit deposed to on the 
26 April 2021 as EXHIBIT 28.5.15? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Siyabonga Innocent 
Gama that starts at page 250.262 is admitted as an exhibit 
and will be marked as EXHIBIT 28.5.15. 
AFFIDAVIT 
OF 
MR 
SIYABONGA 
INNOCENT 
GAMA 
STARTING AT PAGE 250.262 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT 
28.5.16. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mr Gama, this affidavit deals 
with the affidavit of witness 2.  What I would like to do is to 
take you to that affidavit and then we will also obviously go 
through what is in effect your response.  But perhaps, if 
20 
you wish, leave open bundle 7 at page 250.262.  Could I 
ask you to draw out bundle BB14D? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh, bundle 6, can I send that 
away for the time being? 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Bundle 
6? 
 
Yes, 
you 
can, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 55 of 416 
 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Thank you.  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   BB14D.  If I could ask you – and I 
am now going to refer you to the red numbers of the right 
hand side.  Could you turn to page 89 please?  Are you 
there? 
MR GAMA:   Almost.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Are you there, Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   Yes I am. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I want to just take you through this 
10 
affidavit.  Witness 2 says: 
1. I am employed as a senior security official in the 
Transnet Group, I have been appointed to this 
position at Transnet with effect from the year 
2019.   
2. I was previously employed as CPO personal 
driver for Siyabonga in his capacity as Chief 
Executive Transnet Freight Rail and later as 
Group Chief Executive Transnet.” 
Are you able to confirm that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   I confirm number 2, not number 1. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Presumably because you do not 
have personal knowledge of paragraph 1? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 56 of 416 
 
“3. 
For the period January 2018 to December 
2019 I was self-employed.  In this period I 
was contracted to perform close protection 
duties for various business people in South 
Africa and other African countries.” 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I can comment on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You are going to cross-refer to your 
affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, just give us second, we can 
balance everything.  Chairperson, that is bundle 7, Mr 
Gama wishes to cross-refer to his affidavit, that is the 
affidavit at 250.262, bundle 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I have got it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please go ahead. 
MR GAMA:   I think we now use the black numbers? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja on that one you use black numbers. 
MR GAMA:   So if we turn to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you will start dealing with witness 
20 
2 at page 250.265, it starts on the other page but there is 
nothing of substance on the other page, if that is what you 
are looking for? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  So that page, Chair, 260.265 (sic). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 57 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   I record …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You start at paragraph 9 and in 
paragraph 9.1 you deal with paragraphs 1 to 4 of witness 
2’s affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR GAMA:   So if you look at 9.1, 9.2 and 9.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You just want to say that is where you 
respond – you comment about this. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   It is just a bit far(?) 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, well let me take you through 
that, Mr Gama, I suppose the easiest is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the lighting quite bad there or 
sometimes you see better without the specs. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  It is closer, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Do you want to repeat 
what you say in the affidavit or you just wanted to refer Mr 
Myburgh to …[intervenes] 
20 
MR GAMA:   I wanted to refer Mr Myburgh in as far as the 
issue of the period of employment where he indicates that 
he was self-employed for the period of January 2018 to 
December 2019. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 58 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   That my information is that he was employed 
at the firm that is recorded there in 9.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   For the period 21 August 2018 to 31 January 
2020 which I believe is a material and inexplicable 
omission in terms of what he indicates to you in point 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, can I just ask you, what is the 
source of your information? 
MR GAMA:   From the firm itself.  I was aware of it and I 
10 
confirmed it.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then if I can take you 
back to witness 2’s affidavit who says – witness 2 says at 
paragraph 5 at red numbers 89: 
“I have been involved in the close protection 
industry since 1995 but officially qualified as a CPO 
in 2007.  I am registered as a CPO with the private 
security 
industry 
regulation 
authority, 
PSiRA.  
Through the years I have provide close protection 
services to various clients in the public and private 
20 
sectors both locally and internationally.” 
Do you have a comment in relation to those three 
paragraphs? 
MR GAMA:   No, I have no personal knowledge. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then under the heading: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 59 of 416 
 
“Duties as CPO and acting as driver for Gama.” 
Paragraph 8: 
“The primary objective of providing CPO services to 
Gama was to ensure that his safety was not 
compromised.” 
Do you agree with that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes in terms of the job description. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 9: 
“My duties as …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember not to lower your voice 
10 
too much, Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   Okay, thank you, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 9: 
“My duties as CPO and private driver for Gama 
included the following: 
1. On normal working days I would collect Gama at 
his residence at around 06h00 in the morning and 
transport him to the office or to meet in venues 
during the day as per his diary.  It was not 
unusual to work 15 hour days and on many 
20 
occasions only arriving home after midnight.” 
Do you wish to comment on that?   
MR GAMA:   No, nothing to add, I agree with that 
statement. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   9.1.1: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 60 of 416 
 
“For the last number of years a colleague assisted 
me with the protection and transporting of Gama.  
We used to alternate our working schedules where 
one of us would be transporting Gama whilst the 
other one would be performing administrative tasks 
or having off days.” 
Do you wish to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, that is correct but maybe incomplete. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is there something you want to add? 
MR GAMA:   Yes also there would have been occasions 
10 
where both of them would be in convoy but not necessarily 
in the same car.  If they needed to do some kind of 
reconnaissance for whatever reason, one would go ahead 
or be in convoy. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  9.1.2: 
“Other CPOs who assisted with the protection of 
Gama over the years included a colleague who later 
on became the CPO for Thamsanqa Jiyane, Chief 
Procurement Officer at Transnet at the time and a 
certain Bongani whose name I cannot recall and 
20 
who later passed away.” 
Comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   It is a CPO for who, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Jiyane. 
MR GAMA:   I am just thinking in the record you did not – it 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 61 of 416 
 
should be Thamsanqa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am indebted to you, Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I missed that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, it is the DCJ that usually picks 
me out but please feel free to do the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I did not hear it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But other than that point would you 
agree with that paragraph? 
MR GAMA:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We then go over the page, 
paragraph 9.2: 
“I 
furthermore 
often 
transported 
Gama 
over 
weekends on private trips.  Some of these trips 
were to visit his family in Swaziland and Kwazulu-
Natal or friends and business people in and around 
Gauteng.  On occasions I transported him to Durban 
where he owns a flat.  Whilst in Durban I used to 
stay at the Maharani Hotel.  I have never been 
invited to join Mr Gama at his flat.” 
20 
Wish to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I note it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 9.3: 
“I 
was 
also 
responsible 
to 
look 
after 
the 
maintenance of Gama’s private vehicles.  Gama 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 62 of 416 
 
never made use of official Transnet transport, he 
always 
used 
his 
private 
vehicles 
for 
official 
purposes.” 
Confirm that? 
MR GAMA:   No, he was not responsible – he is not a 
mechanic, so I do not know when he says he looked after 
the maintenance of private vehicles. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you say he was not responsible 
for the maintenance? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Was he responsible for making – 
sorry, DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I am just wondering whether 
witness 2’s use of maintenance there relates to the job of a 
mechanic or whether it is something more superficial but of 
course we do not know, he has used maintenance here.  I 
think we can move on. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  If he was not responsible for 
the maintenance and the technical would he have been 
responsible for ensuring that your vehicles were in good 
20 
order, in working condition? 
MR GAMA:   No, I never got to watch them and so on.  Ja, 
from time to time the vehicles were dirty then they would 
be taken to a car wash. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 9.4: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 63 of 416 
 
“The following vehicles owned by Gama were used 
to transport him on official and private trips namely: 
1. BMW X5.  This vehicle was later given to Gama’s 
daughter. 
2. Range Rover Vogue, which a fully armoured 
vehicle, a photograph of this vehicle is attached.” 
Perhaps we could go to that, using the red numbers.  
Could I ask you please to go to page 104?  Do you wish to 
comment on that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see some …[intervenes] 
10 
MR GAMA:   It could be or not be a picture of the car, I do 
not know, it is a side picture, so I …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, I beg your pardon? 
MR GAMA:   I am saying it could be or not be. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wanted to say, Mr Myburgh, for the 
record I see that some pages in this bundle have got both 
the black and the red numbers. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we will stick to the red numbers 
20 
throughout, is that right, on this bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, for the purposes of this 
evidence, if we could stick to the red numbers please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What colour was your Range Rover 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 64 of 416 
 
Vogue, Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:   Black. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, just so that I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say black? 
MR GAMA:   Black. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Black, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just so I understand your evidence, 
you say with reference to this photograph this may or may 
not be your vehicle? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Then please go back to 
paragraph 9.4.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe one can ask – the picture may or 
may not have been your vehicle but is the picture similar to 
your vehicle? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, similar. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes and then the third vehicle listed 
is: 
“A Mercedes Benz 500 which was often used for 
20 
trips to Kwazulu-Natal.  Fourth vehicle listed, a 
Mercedes Benz SL63 which was mostly used as a 
weekend vehicle, photograph of this vehicle is 
attached as annexure W202.” 
That you find at red number page 106.  Do you want to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 65 of 416 
 
comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   I agree. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the fifth vehicle that is 
listed is: 
“A Mercedes Benz S65 since 2017 this vehicle was 
used 
to 
alternate 
with 
the 
Range 
Rover 
in 
paragraph 942.” 
Do want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, nothing to add. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
10 
MR GAMA:   Nothing to add. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then over the page, paragraph 9.5: 
“Other vehicles that Mr Gama owned over the years 
were the following.” 
Perhaps I can just paraphrase this because it is not of 
particular importance.   
“A Land Rover Discovery, a Lexus 4 x 4, a Lexus 
Sedan, a BMW 320 and a Mini Cooper.” 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I think he is talking about cars that he 
20 
may have seen over the years. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MR GAMA:   Whether I owned them or not, I think 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which maybe since he says you owned 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 66 of 416 
 
them, maybe you might be, maybe you might wish to 
specify which ones you owned, which ones you did not own 
because he makes the allegation that you owned them. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, no, he has made that allegation on all the 
vehicles but it is not true.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay [laughing] okay. 
MR GAMA:   He would see my daughter ’s car and then he 
says it is my car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well do you want to clarify that, do 
you want to clarify which ones you own, which ones you 
10 
may not have owned.  
MR GAMA:   Like the X5 is my daughter ’s car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
MR GAMA:   The BMW X5 is my daughter ’s car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, did you own it before you gave it to 
her or you bought it for her without first owning it? 
MR GAMA:   No, it was hers.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   I just sometimes used it because you could – 
it is a diesel you can go to Durban and then come back on 
20 
it, on what it gives you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   I would not have to fill too much petrol. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Gama if you look at paragraph 
9.5, which of those vehicles did you not own? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 67 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   The Lexus four by four, I did not own, the 
Land Cruiser I did not own, the Mini Cooper was also my 
daughters. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So just so that I understand it, the 
Mini Cooper, you say it was my daughter's car, you did not 
own it? 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, the Mini Cooper? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   I am saying it was my daughter's car. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, and then the Land Rover 
10 
Discovery and the Lexus four by four at 951 Witness 2 says 
Land Rover Discovery, which was later traded to buy the 
Range Rover referred to in paragraph 9.4.2, do you deny 
that? 
MR GAMA:   No, no I have said to you the Lexus four by 
four I did not own, that is 952. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   952 Lexus four by four which was 
used by Mr Gama’s wife. 
MR GAMA:   And also the Land Cruiser I did not own and 
the Mini Cooper I did not own. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Where do I find the Land Cruiser? 
MR GAMA:   It is on 952, it says an old Land Cruiser. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, Lexus four by four which was 
used by Mr Gama’s wife an old Land Cruiser was traded to 
buy this.  So you say that 952 is wrong in its entirety? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 68 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   I am saying I did not own the cars.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   I never owned them at the time when they 
were there.  A lot of these cars sometimes he would rightly 
point out they were there and then they were replaced by 
other cars but it is not like I have that fleet of cars maybe 
in - I do not have.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 9.6: 
“Due to the fact that we used Gama’s private 
vehicles for transport, I did not keep log books of 
10 
daily trips undertaken by him.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I think it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then under the heading trips to 
the Gupta residence, paragraph 10: 
“I can recall that I have transported Gama on four 
occasions to the Gupta residence at Saxonwold 
Drive Johannesburg, none of these trips were 
recorded in his diary.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Ja, no none of that happened it is a fiction. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   On the one occasion that you say 
you went to the Gupta residence did Witness 2, take you 
there? 
 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 69 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   He may have. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So he may have taken you once? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 11: 
“On arrival at the residence, Gama would go into 
the house.  I would wait for him to return in the 
vehicle in the parking area inside the premises.” 
And comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   What he could say that is that on arrival at 
the residence, I went into the house and then I came out 
10 
instead of saying I would – as if it was a regular thing. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, 12: 
“Whilst waiting for Gama in the parking area. I have 
seen Jiyane's, white VW Golf R parked in the 
parking area on two occasions.  I actually saw 
Jiyane going into the residence on one occasion.” 
MR GAMA:   No, I cannot comment on that, I know nothing 
about that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 13: 
“One day Jiyane mentioned to me in passing, that I 
20 
was being exposed to the quote “shady stuff that 
they do.”  I did not ask him what he meant and left 
it at that, on third you referred to his and Gama’s 
dealings with the Gupta family.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 70 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   No, I know nothing about that, sir I deny any 
reference to any shady stuff but I do not know what he 
discussed with Jiyane but he says he discussed it with him, 
whether it happened or not I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 14, on a…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, the transcribers can 
they tell me whether they hear Mr Gama clearly, is that a 
thumbs up or what is that, he must raise his voice?  Okay, 
please try and speak up. 
MR GAMA:   Okay, I will get closer to the mic, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 14: 
“On another occasion whilst waiting for Gama in the 
parking area at the residence Brian Molefe arrived 
with his Audi S8 and he went into the house.  He 
drove there on his own, at the time, he had already 
been seconded to Eskom as CEO.” 
You want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, I have no knowledge. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you know whether Mr Molefe ever 
20 
drove an Audi S8? 
MR GAMA:   Whether he drives an Audi S8, no I thought it 
was an A8, I am not sure I think he used to have a silver 
A8, I am not aware of S8, I think an S8 is a different make 
of car. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 71 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do you know whether Mr Jiyane 
ever drove a white VW Golf R? 
MR GAMA:   No, I am not aware. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then under the heading suitcase 
collected at Gupta residence paragraph 15: 
“During or about November 2016, during one of the 
visits to the Gupta residence, while I was waiting in 
the parking area in the Range Rover for Gama, he 
came out of the residence and told me that I should 
expect the person that would be bringing a bag to 
10 
me in a few minutes.  Approximately 10 minutes 
later, a man who I think is a relative of the Gupta’s 
came out of the house with a suitcase in his hand.  
He came to the vehicle and said that I must open 
the boot, which I did.  He gave the suitcase to me 
and I put it into the boot.  I noticed that it was a 
polo branded suitcase, a picture of the suitcase 
similar to one referred to is attached as Annexure 
W2-03.” 
Before I – or let take you to that picture and then ask you 
20 
to comment on the whole paragraph.  That picture you find 
Mr Gama, red number page 108.   
MR GAMA:   Ja, I see. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 72 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What do you say to paragraph 15, do 
you have any comment?  
MR GAMA:   Yes, I can comment it never happened, as I 
have testified to the Commission I did not know any people 
who stayed in the residence so I do not think they would 
have given me anything.  I have never seen the suitcase, 
as I have said to you I was there for about 10 to 15 
minutes and went in with Mr Essa came out with him.  there 
was no such – this is fiction.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I see that he says that is Witness 2, that 
10 
this was on or about November 2016.  I remember from the 
affidavit of yours that we dealt with earlier that it seems 
that when you went to the Gupta residence it was around 
November, was it 2015 or was it 2016? 
MR GAMA:   It was 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2015, yes and we know Mr Myburgh 
whether during 2015, Witness 2 was providing protection 
services to Mr Gama because I am wondering if whether we 
are dealing with a situation where you did go there, there a 
problem with the dates and then maybe about whether 
20 
there was a suitcase or not, but whether - because he also 
refers to November and I think in your affidavit you talk 
about November but as you say 2015. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   For what period of time did Witness 
2, provide you with CP0 services? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 73 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   I think according to his – there was something 
in the earlier paragraphs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought he deals somewhere with the 
periods when he was providing protection services to you 
but I do not see it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He says generally at paragraph 2, 
you would have seen DCJ, 
“I was previously employed as a CPO and personal 
driver 
for 
Mr 
Gama 
in 
his 
capacity 
of 
Chief 
Executive of Transnet and ten later as the new CEO 
10 
of Transnet.” 
Can you remember what period of time he provided you 
with CPO services? 
MR GAMA:   I suspect it would have been between 2013 
and 2017. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And hence, as you said he might 
have been the driver who – or he might have taken you to 
the Gupta residence on the one occasion that you say you 
went there. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I think he probably did.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then at paragraph 16: 
“On Gama’s return from the residence he asked me 
to take him to the Maslow Hotel at the corner of 
Rivonia and Grayston Drive in Sandton.  I dropped 
Gama at the entrance of the hotel and went to park 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 74 of 416 
 
the vehicle.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   It never happened. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 17: 
“After a while I went into the hotel to order 
something to drink.  I noticed that Gama and Jiyane 
were sitting in the lounge by the bar.  A few minutes 
later Gama called me and instructed me to take the 
suitcase that he collected from the Gupta residence 
and to put it in the boot of Jiyane's vehicle.  Jiyane 
10 
gave me his keys and explained to me where his 
vehicle was parked.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   It never happened. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 18: 
“As instructed I went to the Range Rover and took 
the suitcase from the boot and took it to Jiyane's 
vehicle, a white Mercedes Benz GL, which was 
parked 
close to the entrance 
of the hotel. I 
subsequently put the suit suitcase in the boot of 
20 
Jiyane's vehicle, but before I closed the boot, I 
decided to see what was inside the suitcase.  When 
I opened it, I saw that the bag was stacked with 
cash. The top layer contained bundles of R50, 00 
and R100,00 notes.  I locked Jiyane’s vehicle and 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 75 of 416 
 
did not say anything to either Gama or Jiyane of 
what I had seen inside the suitcase.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   It never happened Chair.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   During the time that Witness 2, 
provided you with CPO services, did you have occasion to 
visit the Maslow Hotel at the corner Rivonia and Grayston 
Drive, is it somewhere you would go? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I have on occasion many occasions 
visited that hotel, Maslow. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then under the heading 
collections at Melrose Arch, paragraph 19: 
“During the period of providing CPO services for 
Gama 
I 
transported 
him 
to 
Melrose 
Arch 
in 
Johannesburg 
on 
three 
occasions, 
where 
he 
collected cash from Salim Essa.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   No, it did not happen. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you ever meet Mr Essa at 
Melrose Arch? 
20 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you know where Mr Essa’s 
officers were? 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not know that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 20: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 76 of 416 
 
“Gama 
introduced 
me 
to 
Essa 
on 
a 
previous 
occasion, I have learned through media reports that 
Essa is linked to the Gupta’s.  I attach hereto as 
Annexure 
W2-04 
a 
picture 
obtained 
from 
the 
internet as confirmation that this is the person 
known to me as Essa.” 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I ask you please to go to red 
number page 110, one one zero, do you want to comment 
on that paragraph and the photograph? 
MR GAMA:   I can take a picture of DCJ is covered fairly 
10 
often in the newspaper, it will have his picture and his 
name and I can say this is the person that is known as 
Justice Zondo.  I do not know what to make of it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But, do you know, picture at page 
110, do you know that to be Salim Essa? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, I know that as Salim Essa. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then Witness 2 says at paragraph 
21: 
“I can specifically recall the details of two of the 
collections which are discussed below.” 
20 
And then he starts with a collection on the 13 t h of June 
2017 and he says at paragraph 22: 
“In the first instance, which occurred on 13 June 
2017, Gama contacted me and requested that I 
should collect a parcel from Essa at the Melrose 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 77 of 416 
 
apartments and thereafter pick him up at the African 
Pride Hotel in Melrose Arch.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   May I request that we take all of it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I think that is perhaps best then 
you can refer to the minutes that you want to or should we 
go through the whole thing, okay fair enough.  And then at 
paragraph 23: 
“As instructed I drove to the Melrose apartments 
where I waited for Essa in the parking area. 
10 
Sometime after my arrival at Melrose Arch Essa 
approached me where I was waiting in Gama’s 
Range Rover.  Essa handed over a striped bag with 
a zip to me, I attach here to a picture of a bag 
similar to the one that Essa handed to me as 
Annexure W2-05.” 
Perhaps I could ask you to go to page 112 red numbers 
there you will find a picture of the bag.  If we go back to 
paragraph 23 at the foot of the page 94: 
“After putting the bag in the boot of the vehicle I 
20 
drove to the African Pride Hotel where I collected 
Gama at the entrance.  I attach hereto as Annexure 
W2-06 a printout of Google Maps travel history 
obtained from my cellular phone as confirmation 
that I arrived at Melrose Arch at 20h27 and 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 78 of 416 
 
departed at 21h36.” 
Now that Annexure you find at page 114 and there you will 
see the bottom part of the page reference to Melrose Arch 
and 8:27 and 9:36pm.  We go back to paragraph 24: 
“Later that evening I transported Gama to an 
address in Bryanston where close friend of his 
swayed.” 
See Annexure W2-06 as confirmation that I arrived 
at the Bryanston address at 22h37 and that I 
departed from there at 01h57 in the early morning.” 
10 
That annexure you find at red number page 117 and then 
you will see at the foot of the page their reference to a 
Bryanston 
address 
and 
choose 
a 
time 
10:37pm 
and 
1:57am.  Now and if we go to paragraph 25: 
“While after arriving at his close friend’s residence 
Gama opened the bag inside the boot and I saw that 
it was stacked with R200,00 notes.  I assisted 
Gama to count the money right there in the boot in 
the Range Rover.  To the best of my recollection, 
the amount came to approximately R1million.” 
20 
Paragraph 26: 
“Gama divided the cash amount approximately in 
half.  He took the one half inside the house, we 
handed he handed it to his close friend.  From the 
other half he counted out R50 000,00 which he gave 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 79 of 416 
 
me as a present.  At the time I was in the process 
of building my house in Soweto, I used some of this 
money to buy building material the remaining money 
was left in the bag in the boot of the vehicle, which 
he later took from the boot of the vehicle at his 
residence in Midrand when I dropped him off.” 
I think you want to cross refer Mr Gama to your affidavit? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please go ahead. 
MR GAMA:   Thank you.  So I will deal if 13 t h of June ne”. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, 2017. 
MR GAMA:   So on this particular day that he refers to and 
it is even certain times and the Google Maps. I have 
attached for your reference what actually transpired on 
that day.  You will see that I was at a meeting in Pretoria 
and if you reference to my affidavit and I think I have 
attached minutes also of that meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, well perhaps I could take 
you through this, so that we can go through it thoroughly, if 
you would try and assist.  You dealing as I understand, 
20 
correct me if I am wrong, Mr Gama with paragraph 13 at 
page 250.266 there it says: 
“At 13 June 2017.” 
Is that right? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 80 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you say at 13.1.1.  
“Witness 2 alleges in paragraph 22 to 26.” 
That is what we have been dealing with. 
“That on 13 June 2017, I contacted him and 
allegedly requested him to collect a parcel from 
Salim 
Essa 
at 
Melrose 
apartments 
and 
that 
following on the collection of the parcel I allegedly 
requested him to collect me from African Pride 
Hotel.  As can be seen from Annexure W2-05, 
Witness 2 arrived at Melrose Arch at 20h27 and 
10 
departed 20h36.” 
You say over the page: 
“I was then allegedly transported to a close friend 
in Bryanston at 20h37 and arrived at my residence 
at 01h57.” 
And you say at paragraph 13.2: 
“I deem it prudent to inform the Commission that 
this is inconsistent with the actual events of the day 
on 13 June 2017, as I was at a point attending a 
special Board meeting of Transnet directors in 
20 
Pretoria, which commenced at 17h33 and ended at 
18h03. I annex hereto marked SG2 a copy of the 
minutes of the aforesaid Board meeting.” 
So this was a half an hour Board meetings, is that right? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 81 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Between half past five and 6 o'clock 
in the afternoon or early evening? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if we can - I can take you then 
to SG2. 
MR GAMA:   So or if you can just finish it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh sorry.  From annexure W2-06:  
“Witness 2 left the meeting in Pretoria at 19h43, 
one hour and 45 minutes after the meeting had 
concluded.  There would have been no reasonable 
10 
explanation for me to stay in Pretoria for an extra 
hour and 40 minutes after the end of the meeting.” 
Okay, so let me just take you then to SG2, SG2 is headed 
minutes of the closed session of the special Board of 
directors meeting – I beg your pardon this is at page 276, 
minutes of the closed session of the special Board of 
directors meeting number 20-17/18FY held at 17:33 on 13 
June 2017 at Platinum Boardroom Building 21 CSIR, Marin 
or Deer Road, Pretoria.” 
Are those the minutes you referred to?  Chairperson, I see 
20 
that it is 1 o'clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you confirm that those are the 
minutes you are referring to? 
MR GAMA:   Those are the minutes I referred to Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay let us take the lunch 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 82 of 416 
 
adjournment and we will resume at two, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Good 
afternoon Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:  Good afternoon Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We had been looking at SG2 at page 
250.276 and we saw that that was a special board meeting 
10 
that was held in Pretoria CSIR and it started at 17:33 and if I 
take you to page – over the page to 277 it finished at 18:03 
it lasted approximately for half an hour from half past five 
until six, correct? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So if I understand the point you make 
in your affidavit at paragraph 13.3 you say that W206 
reflects that Witness 2 left Pretoria at 19H43 – one hour and 
forty minutes after the meeting had concluded.  You say 
there was – would be no reasonable explanation for me to 
20 
stay in Pretoria for one hour and forty minutes after the 
meeting. Is that right? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If we go please to that annexure at 
page 114 – red numbers – 114. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 83 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  The other file? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes I beg your pardon.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So the first part of it appears to reflect 
if one follows how the timing works in other instances and 
explained by Witness 2 that he arrived at CSIR at 9:30 in the 
morning and left at 7.43 pm.  Were you at the CSIR that 
day? 
MR GAMA:  Yes I was. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  As you have it though you would have 
10 
left at approximately what time? 
MR GAMA:  Probably around 18:15. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then the second part the fact that 
you or he arrived at Melrose at 8:37 and departed at 8:36 is 
that then the sum total of your defence on this issue? 
MR GAMA:  Ja what I am basically indicating is that he 
makes assumptions that I may have been with him during all 
of these time periods but for me it is quite clear from the 
minutes of that meeting that – and I think that is also the 
problem that we have with not having the – the full diary 
20 
which is one of the biggest problems Chair that we have 
been facing because as I have indicated I would like to have 
cross-examined Witness 2 and it would have been much 
clearer.  So I am – we are navigating almost at half … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja there are difficulties. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 84 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  Yes well the – I think it would be – it would have 
been much clearer so I tried to use the information at hand 
to indicate that I would not have been with him when he left 
one hour forty minutes after the meeting.  The meeting 
ended – I do not stick around when the meeting has ended I 
leave.  So if he had been there it is possible that he was in a 
different car and he was not with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you remember whether you would 
10 
have gone to that meeting in the car he was driving? 
MR GAMA:  No I do not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not remember. 
MR GAMA:  I do not remember.  That is why I am saying he 
is showing something from his cell phone that he was there 
at 
a 
particular 
time. 
 
He 
may 
have 
been 
in 
the 
reconnaissance car arriving there very early and then 
leaving later but it does not mean that he was with me. Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you have accepted that you were 
20 
at CSIR for the whole day. 
MR GAMA:  I may have been the minutes that I have 
indicated to you they indicate that there was a special 
meeting that took place at 17:33 and it ended at 18:03. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But Mr Gama how can you say with 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 85 of 416 
 
certainty that you would not have – or that you would have 
left immediately and that you would not have stayed there for 
another hour and a half or so? 
MR GAMA:  Because… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How can you say that? 
MR GAMA:  Because there would have been nothing for me 
to stay there for. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what – when you look then at 114 is 
– is it your case that you –you consider this page here to be 
a fraud or are you saying well perhaps Witness 2 went to 
10 
these places but he was not going with me 
MR GAMA:  It may either be a fraud or he may have gone to 
those places but he was not with me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But would Witness 2 have taken you on 
the 13t h of June 2017 to the CSIR in the ordinary course? 
MR GAMA:  Well you see – you say in all records? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No in the ordinary course of events? 
MR GAMA:  Oh in the ordinary course? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Sorry.  Okay.  Ja he – he could have but from 
20 
what I can gather in terms of this navigation schedule it is 
just entirely impossible that at the end of the meeting I would 
stuck around on those premises – that is – that is not even 
our offices so these are not our offices so I could not you 
know have stayed there for an hour and forty minutes after 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 86 of 416 
 
we finished the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How – how many cars would go with him?  
Would there – would you be in one car and then there would 
be another car that in terms of reconnaissance. 
MR GAMA:  Yes sometimes – sometimes it would be my car 
– I am always in my car. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And then there could be… 
CHAIRPERSON:  With one or more of the protectors in your 
car? 
10 
MR GAMA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
MR GAMA:  With one protector in my car. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Driving and then the other one being … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  The one who is on the lookout yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and the other one would – would follow 
you or be in front of your one? 
MR GAMA:  We would always – Chair they would… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Inaudible). 
MR GAMA:  They would almost always be in front. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR GAMA:  Almost always be in front or in convoy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 87 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  They would not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  When I have left there is no reason to be 
staying behind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  So I do not understand if he is claiming that he 
was with me or why at the meeting he stayed behind.  I 
doubt it that – it may be a day when he was off and maybe 
just decided that he was going to travel there because he – 
he knew that we were working there and then continued with 
10 
whatever else he was doing there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The – most of the – that day to the 
extent that this reflects that he was there what is true is that 
you were also there for most of that day, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Ja for a period yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja for a certain number of hours. 
MR GAMA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were in the same place? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Now you – you cannot remember or 
20 
could – can you whether you would have been – he would 
have driven your car or whether he would have been in the 
other one on that day? 
MR GAMA:  I do not think he drove my car Chair.  This is 
what I am saying. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 88 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh okay. 
MR GAMA:  This is what I am saying that I do not think…  
CHAIRPERSON:  On your version he would be in the other 
car. 
MR GAMA:  Ja, yes I do not think he drove my car or this is 
not in sync with reality. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  But in terms of practice and 
what used to happen is the position that the two cars insofar 
as one of them has got you inside would – would be 
supposed to be together? 
10 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  So if there was a minute apart. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  That is the normal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Discrepancy I would not have a problem with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  But an hour and forty minutes is just too much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is just too much yes. 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So assuming that is not a situation 
where he was – okay let us put it this way because I think 
there are facts that both of you agree upon namely for a 
certain number of hours you were in the same place on that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 89 of 416 
 
day okay.  And even on your version he would have been 
there in his official capacity would have been working he 
would not be there on his own – on his private you know – 
for his private purposes alright.  Now one would – one would 
have assumed and you must tell me if that assumption is 
wrong that he would therefore – because he was at work he 
would be expected to be there for as long as work required 
him to be there and would leave when work required him to 
leave. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unless he decided to do his own things 
and that I would image maybe you would be aware if he – if 
he changed and left work at that time. So – so would you – 
would you accept or would you not accept that the 
probabilities are that there – there whatever time he was 
there including the time that you think he would not have 
been there he is supposed to be connected with – he is not 
supposed to have started doing his own things, is that a fair 
assumption? 
MR GAMA:  Yes it is supposed to be connected with work 
20 
and Chair the whole concept of close protection… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  Is that you would be very close to the principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And you do not wonder away. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 90 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Go (speaking over one another). 
MR GAMA:  And do other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  And – so that is why I was saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  Even if he was in his own car if it was made 
within a minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine. 
MR GAMA:  Or two I would then say look we were together. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR GAMA:  But I do not know from this and I can say 
without fear of any contradiction Chair that he was not in the 
same car as me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes at least that – that – he was on your 
version he would have been on the other – in the other car? 
MR GAMA:  Hm and also if he is off Chair he may have gone 
to – to whatever was being done there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  But then stayed behind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR GAMA:  Because he was doing something else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  He would not be required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes he would not be required yes. 
MR GAMA:  To – to follow me what I left for home. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 91 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know how categorically you 
maybe that you left at a particular time or as soon as the 
meeting 
ended 
because 
one 
knows 
from 
experience 
sometimes depending on how first one is for time sometimes 
when meetings finish sometimes people hang around and 
talk more and so on even though maybe sometimes that 
amount of time might be unusual. 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  No it would not have happened Chair.  Let 
10 
us say one was there from midday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  As an example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  By the time it is 18:00 and you finish with your 
meetings you would – there is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to go. 
MR GAMA:  There is no reason to – if it was you know my 
offices I would then say okay maybe I went back to the 
office. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  And did some work maybe I had some files. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  But this situation does not arise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 92 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you.  So if we go back to the 
affidavit page 94. 
MR GAMA:  My one? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No Witness 2’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course I am sorry Mr Myburgh – of 
course Mr Gama this is all on the assumption that the time 
stipulated in the minutes is correct or when the meeting 
ended? 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
No, 
no 
absolutely, 
absolutely 
and 
our 
secretaries and minute takers they were always spot on. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  In fact if – if they say the meeting started 17:33 
it may have been late. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR GAMA:  Because maybe it was 17:13 meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So do I understand then if you go to 
page 95 that what you saying is you did not go Melrose Arch 
– page 95.  Red numbers. 
MR GAMA:  Where –  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At the top of the page.  Is that what 
you are saying? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  Did you then later that evening 
go to this address in Bryanston of a close friend of yours? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 93 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  I do not know.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay let us have a look at what – go 
back to this annexure at 114.  In fact at 115 at the foot of the 
page it says: 
“22 Egland Road, Bryanston.” 
MR GAMA:  114.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  114 and the second page of it is 115.  
It reflects that Witness 2 arrived at this Bryanston address at 
10:37 pm and that he left at 1:57 am.  Did you go there that 
evening? 
10 
MR GAMA:  No it is highly doubtful ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry. 
MR GAMA:  It is highly doubtful Chair. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well would there have been any reason 
for Witness 2 to go there without you? 
MR GAMA:  Yes sometimes if they were driving – even when 
I am not there sometimes they would even be at my home 
waiting for me.  Let us say I just an example.  If I go to Cape 
Town and I am coming back on the same day they will drop 
me at the airport and then they will go to the office for a few 
20 
hours and sometimes they will go and wash the car and then 
go to my home and then an hour before the flight arrives 
then they will come through.  Sometimes he will go to his 
home and come back just before the – so there was a lot of 
carte blanche in terms of what people could do.  If somebody 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 94 of 416 
 
said okay maybe I needed to go and wait somewhere they 
would go and wait.  I would not know.  The biggest problem 
with this thing is that there are inconsistencies.  He talks for 
a – and I think the main thing he says no there was some 
money that was exchanged. There was money that got given 
to him.  But none of these things happened it is a fiction. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama I just want to understand 
this paragraph 24 he says: 
“Later that evening I transported Gama to an 
address in Bryanston.” 
10 
Did he do that or did he not? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did Witness 2 transport you to an 
address in Bryanston? 
MR GAMA:  I am saying it is highly doubtful. It is highly 
doubtful because it does not look like he was actually 
working with me on that particular day and there is nobody 
who comes on the night shift.  You work the whole day and 
then – and then you finish.  Because if he was working why 
did he stay behind in Pretoria when I left? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is on your version? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja on your version. 
MR GAMA:  Because sometimes if – if a person is not 
working they will still go if the other one says look the – 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 95 of 416 
 
there are going to be a lot people that we do not know there 
and maybe during this time you could be there and then after 
that you could leave. So if I left say at 18:15 and he stayed 
behind it could be that he was not at work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gama did you have a close friend 
who resided at 22 Egland Road, Bryanston? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Not your house? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what would have caused Witness 2 
then literally in the middle of the night to go to this address 
at 10:37 and leave at 1:57? 
MR GAMA:  Well I mean – one of the things that I have 
indicated that he – he has not testified to which arose for 
instance is that he was seen at some point trespassing 
outside of that particular property. So the – the address 
could show that the person is there but he is not inside he is 
just on the verge.  He was caught in the cameras trespassing 
in that particular area at a point so you never know you know 
20 
what – what was his motive in some of these things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you – are you saying there is an 
incident that you know of. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of which he went to this address 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 96 of 416 
 
without you and without your knowledge? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that is a particular incident.  But 
generally speaking would the position be that in your 
absence he would have no legitimate reason to go there. 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As far as you are concerned? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Correct. 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  And did you – I might have 
asked you this – did you on the – the evening or the night of 
13 June go to this residence of your close friend in 
Bryanston? 
MR GAMA:  I have indicated that this is his google map I do 
not have my own so this is the – this is the problem.  If I had 
the diary I would be able to say there are certain things in 
there that are just inconsistent and I do not understand – it 
is his Google Maps that is where he says he was it does not 
20 
mean that is where I was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just on this issue of the diary because it is 
the second time you mentioned it.  Would that have been 
your diary that you are looking for that you were using at the 
time? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 97 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Is it a diary that would have 
remained at Transnet when you left or is it a diary that you 
would have taken with you but you cannot find anymore? 
MR GAMA:  No it is a diary that remained at Transnet an 
electronic diary which would have been quite useful 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  Because it will tell you the day starts on such 
and such a time these are the meetings and this is what has 
happened.  You will see Chair that they have tried to give 
10 
some kind of reproduction which is SG4 but those things are 
nothing more than .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On – in – is that the same bundle? 
MR GAMA:  Ja on the same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
MR GAMA:  250.297. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I think it is the other bundle.  250. 
MR GAMA:  297. 
CHAIRPERSON:  297. – 297? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I see that ja. 
MR GAMA:  So if – if you look at that it is very difficult to 
see I probably cannot see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is very fine print. 
MR GAMA:  The end of my options of seeing. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 98 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is fine print ja. 
MR GAMA:  But in there it would show a person’s name like 
a meeting request – somebody who requested a meeting.  
The people to whom that meeting requests was sent to and 
then it will have the heading in terms of what was that 
particular meeting.  And that is what assisted in some part to 
say there was a meeting in Pretoria – there was a board 
meeting in Pretoria and then therefore one was able to call 
for the minutes and – of that particular meeting. But I cannot 
say for instance that using that I cannot say was I there from 
10 
9:30 like he was there at 9:30 it say.  And even his – if you 
look at which I did not go into – if you look at his  
CHAIRPERSON:  Affidavit. 
MR GAMA:  His affidavit the pictures there at – is it 114 that 
we were referring to? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think it was 114. 
MR GAMA:  So if we can go there Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GAMA:  It says that before – if you look right at the 
beginning it says he was driving for three hours forty three 
20 
minutes in the morning.  So I do not know where if you going 
to Pretoria from Johannesburg you drive for three hours forty 
three minutes it does not say where that trip started.  It is 
one of those anomalies where I am saying if you look at this 
thing I do not know whether there is any reliance that you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 99 of 416 
 
can place on this particular thing page 114 and 115. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GAMA:  It – I think if you – I do not know whether but it 
is miles – it is probably miles and says forty four miles – if it 
is miles for three hours forty three minutes and then parked 
from 9:30 which would mean that the person would have left 
home maybe around five thirty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five thirty. 
MR GAMA:  Or maybe around – let us say six o’clock and for 
three hours forty three minutes almost four hours you driving 
10 
from Midrand to Pretoria.  It does not – it does not make 
sense.  And it is all of those things Chair which makes one 
highly suspicious about whether you can place any kind of 
reliance on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay  Mr Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright let us go back to page 95 of 
Witness 2’s affidavit and deal with the second collection he 
says called on the 13t h of July 2017 and Mr Gama perhaps 
what I will do is I will go through the whole part again I am 
mindful of the defence that you raise in your affidavit and 
20 
then you can address me.  Paragraph 27: 
“The second instance occurred a month later 
on 13 July 2017 when Gama instructed me to 
drive him to the Melrose Apartments where 
Essa stayed.  On our arrival I parked the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 100 of 416 
 
Range Rover in the parking area at the 
apartments Gama went inside to meet with 
Essa.  Approximately I presume that and 
should not be there thirty minutes later Gama 
walking with Essa returned with a plastic bag 
which he put in the boot of the vehicle.  He 
then instructed me to drive to the residence 
of a person he knew in Sandhurst.” 
Paragraph 28.  
“While Gama visited such person inside the 
10 
house I waited for him in the vehicle. I 
subsequently decided to check what was 
inside the plastic bag which he collected 
from Essa.  When I opened the plastic bag I 
noticed it was filled with packets of R200 
notes bound with elastic bands.” 
Paragraph 29. 
“I 
attach 
hereto 
as Annexure 
W2-07 
a 
printout of Google Maps Travel history on my 
cell phone as confirmation that I arrived at 
20 
Melrose Arch at 15H51 and departed at 
17H04.  The travel history shows that I 
arrived at 25 Cleveland Road, Sandhurst at 
17H26 and departed from there at 19H05.  I 
attach hereto as Annexure W2-08 a printout 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 101 of 416 
 
from 
Google 
Maps 
indicating 
that 
the 
Sandhurst residence visited is diagonally 
opposite 25 Cleveland Road as I explained.” 
 
Now those two annexures the first one you will 
find at page 117 you will see there at the top the first two or 
Melrose Arch 15 ...[record cut] four.  And you will see there 
is a green circle, Consulate General.  At A you will see – 
you will find a time of 17:26 and 19:05.  And then if you go 
over the page ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Sorry, where do you see 17:26? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you see the green circle? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  Where to from here?  
Consulate General.  Opposite that.  You see that time 
there, 17:26? 
MR GAMA:   Oh, okay.  Ja, there is something that says 
17:26. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   19:05. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am – can you see where it is, 
17...  There is a seven. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   One, seven ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It appears to be a six ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Two, six. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...point two six.  Ja, maybe it is 17 but it 
is difficult to tell. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 102 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...eight as well there.  I do not – ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps I can ask the investigators, 
Chairperson.  In fact, I have already asked them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What we have here is an improved 
copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Copy?  Alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I will see if they can perhaps 
10 
improve this page in particular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Maybe there is a different way that it 
can be printed or perhaps print it in a darker or lighter 
colour or something so that it can be seen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the Annexure W-208, you 
will find at 119. 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And there you will see 25 Cleveland 
20 
Road, Sandhurst.   
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then at paragraph 30 you say 
that: 
“Witness 2 says Gama lately... 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 103 of 416 
 
 
Sorry. 
“...later accused me of stealing some of the 
money from the bag.  He then informed my 
manager 
and 
the 
supervisor 
of 
his 
suspicion...” 
 
Now this is also something that you address in 
your affidavit. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Under the heading at 13 July at page 
250.267, paragraph 14. 
10 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You want to go through that? 
MR GAMA:   250 point...? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   250.267. 
MR GAMA:   267.  Thank you.  Ja.  Once again, as I 
indicated Chair, I deny this version that he was with me 
and I have attached minutes of a whole-day meeting that I 
had attended at SG-3 at 250.278.  The minutes will show, 
Chair, that I was at that meeting up until 15:47.  That will 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   ...250.294. 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   On my – is it page 294 where it shows 
when you left or when the meeting ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 104 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   When the meeting ended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The meeting ended – 15.47. 
MR GAMA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  H’m.   
MR GAMA:   And then, Chair, if you then go back to 
250.297 which is the page at the back.   
CHAIRPERSON:   The one with the ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   [laughs] Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR GAMA:   It is always better on the computer.  You can 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   You can make it a little bit bigger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   [Speaker moves away from microphone – 
unclear]  I am trying to use – glass(?) here.  The – on the 
computer it will indicate ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think I have any chance of 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   [laughs] 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh, maybe you can tell me 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   What is in what. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 105 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   ...explain ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In it and then if the Commission’s Legal 
Team can check on the computer and see that is true, that 
it can be placed on record. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So say – although on the hard copy one 
cannot see, on the computer this is what one can see. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay.  So what is in there? 
MR GAMA:   So what is in here, Chair, is an indication that 
10 
– I had a meeting after this meeting which started at 16:00. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is four o’clock? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, at four o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR GAMA:   It started at 16:00 to 18:00.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR GAMA:   So even if he had then said no he was with 
me to go to this Melrose Arch, if the meeting finished at 
15:47, he was in Melrose Arch already in 15:51, four 
minutes later.  It is impossible that I could be – I could 
20 
have been with him.  So I had another meeting with the 
Chairman of the Board of Transnet with the CFO, Mr Peter, 
where we were busy with arrangements in terms of a board 
pack taking the chairman – the chairperson through a 
board pack for an upcoming meeting. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 106 of 416 
 
 
I could not, Chair, have been in Melrose Arch 
and also at the same time be at the Carlton Centre.  It is 
just not possible.  So I am using this to indicate that there 
is no reliance that can be placed on the testimony of 
Witness 2 on either the Google Maps that he talks about or 
on what he alleges to have happened during those times. 
 
So the team has given us – we took this – we 
were given this by the Legal Team of the Commission.  
They have given us these documents.  They will be able to 
cross that and it will show and it will show that there was 
10 
that meeting between myself, the CFO and the chairperson 
of the board.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, I – I mean, perhaps a better 
way to do it is just to ask Mr Gama’s attorneys to print this 
out for us in an A5 or something that we can all read and it 
can then be attached to his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  I think that could happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, you say that on the 
20 
13 t h of July, you attended this whole-day meeting.  If you 
go to page 278.  So this is a meeting that is held at the 
offices of the TNPA, Transnet National Ports Authority in 
Parktown.  Is that right? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 107 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But the minutes, in fact, reflected 
that you were not there the whole day.  If you go to page 
252.85 it reflects that you came there only at 11:03.   
MR GAMA:   That is correct and I stayed until the end of 
the meeting.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, do how we do we know that 
you stayed until the end of the meeting? 
MR GAMA:   Because I was there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When you read the minutes, it seems 
to me that you came there and you told the people a series 
10 
of things from your perspective as the GCE that captured, 
is it not? 
MR GAMA:   H’m.  Ja, there is no way where it says like 
that.  If I had left the meeting, I had intended to – it was a 
day when I had intended to be with them the whole day.  
There was something that took my time early in the 
morning.  I think I only – I joined them an hour later than I 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Two hours later Mr Gama. 
MR GAMA:   ...than I had intended to and I had stayed with 
20 
them the whole day which is why you will see in the – in 
the diaries the meeting between me and the chairperson 
was initially scheduled to start at two o’clock to four 
o’clock and then it was moved to four o’clock to six 
o’clock.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 108 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   So that I could be with them.  So if I had left, 
the people would have recorded that I left before the end 
of the night.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you after – if you go to 285.  It 
says:  The GC, Mr S Gama joined the meeting at 11:03.  He 
was welcomed by the chairperson.  It says:  The GC drew 
the committee’s attention to the following.  There is a 
whole series of bullet points.  It takes us to, I think, to 287 
where it says:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:30 and 
10 
restarted at 12:58.  Do you see that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, that was for lunch. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Was that your input? 
MR GAMA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is it recorded there in those 
passages? 
MR GAMA:   I think my input – there are various names of 
people in terms of they needed to do what. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think what I will – what I am 
looking to ask you is.  If you have a look above the 
20 
heading 8.6 at page 287. 
MR GAMA:   Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will see that the second last 
sentence says:  The DGCE stated that a meeting should be 
arranged with PRSA within the next 45-days.  Do you see 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 109 of 416 
 
that? 
MR GAMA:   At page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Page 287. 
MR GAMA:   Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just above the heading 8.6.  It is 
where it says the meeting was adjourned.  Two lines above 
that – three lines above that you will see there is a 
sentence that says:  The DGCE stated that a meeting 
should be arranged with PRSA within the next 45-days.   
MR GAMA:   Yes, I can read that.  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you see any further reference to 
you in these minutes after that? 
MR GAMA:   So when I arrived, they gave me an 
opportunity to speak and I addressed them on a few things 
and I think I was giving them feedback on certain pertinent 
matters.  And then after that, we sat and they went through 
some of their normal issues.  And we sat through that 
afternoon with them.  Because I had set aside the whole 
day to be with them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja, I understand your evidence.  I 
20 
am just asking you if you see any reference to you having 
said anything after that? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I [laughs] I do not know whether I 
needed to say anything except that – all I am saying is that 
I was at the meeting and I can relate to everything that is 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 110 of 416 
 
in the minutes because it was discussed in my presence.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So if we go back to Witness 2’s 
affidavit.  Did you on this day, the 13 t h of July, did you go 
to 25 Cleveland Road? 
MR GAMA:   I do not know.  I can tell you that he did but I 
do not know.  I do not even know where 25 Cleveland Road 
is.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you know anyone who stays at 25 
Cleveland Road? 
MR GAMA:   No, I do not. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And he says at paragraph 30 that 
you later accused him of stealing some of the money from 
the bag. 
MR GAMA:   No, that is fiction.  It is really fiction.  It is a 
lot of it that we are trying to deal with here.  I never 
accused him of stealing any money.  There is no money 
that he would have stolen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   During ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   I think he is just putting flavour, you know.  
You put some Rajah and some Masala in so that your story 
20 
looks much more colourful and believable.   
CHAIRPERSON:   In – during the entire time that he was 
one of your protectors, is there any time, even if it is not in 
relation to the bag, is there any time when you may have 
accused him of stealing any money? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 111 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   Chair, if ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   At all? 
MR GAMA:   If I had occasion to accused him, he would 
not work for me the following day.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m, h’m. 
MR GAMA:   Because I just would not work with that kind 
of person if I thought that there was something that had 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   So, and I do not know who is this manager of 
10 
his or supervisor that he says I said that he ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct] [Speakers intervening each 
other – unclear] 
MR GAMA:   ...those are the people who would then – but 
there are many close protection officers.  If you have got 
one that steals, you ask the Security Department to change 
that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR GAMA:   And give you another one.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MR GAMA:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Do 
you 
know 
the 
address 
22 Killarney Road, Hyde Park? 
MR GAMA:   Not off hand, Chair. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 112 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if you have a look at page 117 
of Witness 2’s annexure.  You will see that it reflects that 
he then proceeds to 22 Algan(?) Road. 
MR GAMA:   117. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   117.  Arrives at 19:31.  He parks 
19:36.  Was he not dropping you off at this residence of 
your close friend? 
MR GAMA:   Ja, he could have but I do not know this other 
address? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I am sorry? 
10 
MR GAMA:   I am saying he could have but I do not know 
this other address that he says he took me too.  I have not 
been there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the one that you know the Bryanston 
one? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  The one that you do not 
know is 16 Melrose... 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the one you say do not know? 
20 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I am saying I could not have been there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   It says it is African Pride, Melrose Arch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   According to this. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 113 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR GAMA:   I am saying I could not have been there and 
also be with the chairperson of the board at the same time 
at the Carlton.  These are the times that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That... 
MR GAMA:   ...that he was there.  So it is quite possible 
that on his off days he went to a number of places and then 
he then brings this in here and he says this is when he was 
with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR GAMA:   He could not have been with me when I was 
with the chairperson of the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How do you know that you actually 
attended that meeting with the chairperson of the board? 
MR GAMA:   Because it is on the diary. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, but the diary, does that reflect 
that you attended it or does it reflect an appointment? 
MR GAMA:   It reflects an appointment.  It even shows 
when it was moved from one time to the next time.  You do 
20 
not have – when you have meetings with the chairperson of 
the board, you have meetings with the chairperson of the 
board.  They do not change.  If that meeting had changed 
for any reason as it showed that it moved from two o’clock 
to four o’clock, it would then go and show that it changed 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 114 of 416 
 
but it never changed.  It remained there.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Gama, can you think of any 
reason why Witness 2, if he was not dropping you off at 
half-past seven on the evening of 13 July 2017, would have 
gone to 22 Algan Road for five minutes? 
MR GAMA:   I cannot think for him.  I do not know.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You cannot think of any reason? 
MR GAMA:   No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Let us then go back to page 
96 under the heading towards the middle of the page:  
10 
Money found in Gama’s vehicles.  At paragraph 31, 
Witness 2 says: 
“I can recall two instances where I found cash 
in Gama’s vehicles...” 
 
At 32: 
“I do not know where the money came from...” 
 
Under the heading:  Money in boot, Mercedes-
Benz SL63: 
“During or about August or September 2015, 
Gama went on an overseas trip...” 
20 
 
At 34: 
“As part of my normal duties, I would attend to 
the maintenance of Gama’s vehicles. 
In his absence, I went to check on the 
condition of his vehicles at his residence in 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 115 of 416 
 
Pony Lane in Midrand. 
Upon inspecting the Mercedes-Benz SL63, I 
found stacks of R 200,00 notes in the spare 
wheel compartment of the vehicle.   
I 
estimated 
the 
amount 
to 
be 
around 
R 100 000,00...” 
 
Would you like to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  I think if anybody had found money in a 
vehicle they would have come to me and said:  I have 
found some money in the vehicle.  There was no time when 
10 
Witness 2 never came to me and said:  Go look.  I have 
found some money.  I do not think you would see money 
the way that he kept saying that he sees money.  That you 
would see money and keep quiet, you know.   
 
You would see money and say:  Hey, I found 
money here.  Maybe you forgot about it.  Or whatever.  
There was no such.  It is all just fiction in his head where 
he is trying to create some kind of a story.  Because what 
did he do when he found the money?  Did he come to me 
and said:  I found some money.  Maybe, have you 
20 
misplaced some money?  I have got money now. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Mr Game, before we get to 
that.  Was there R 100 000,00 in the wheel compartment of 
your vehicle? 
MR GAMA:   No, there was not. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 116 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh. 
MR GAMA:   Never ever. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Did 
you 
go 
overseas 
in 
August/September 2015? 
MR GAMA:   I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right.  You stay in Pony Lane in 
Midrand. 
MR GAMA:   I think he would know where I stayed, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And you were at a point 
driving a Mercedes-Benz SL63? 
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And would it be unusual for him to 
check on the condition of your vehicles whilst you are 
away? 
MR GAMA:   I not sure if I have asked him.  I do not 
remember asking him to check and the condition.  I do not 
think [laughs] it was necessary for him to check any 
condition.  Why would he travel when I am not there to go 
and check on the condition of the car when my children can 
start a car and switch if off it needed to be? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When you were overseas, what did 
the CPO’s that were assigned to you, what would the 
typically do? 
MR GAMA:   They normally take leave. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if they do not take leave? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 117 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   Then they would probably be assigned to 
someone else to work during that time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then Witness 2 goes on under the 
heading:  Money in boot of Range Rover.   
“On 20 April, I transported Gama do an official 
diarised meeting at the offices of Denel.  
Nellmapius Drive, Irene in Centurion. 
The meeting was called by the former Minister 
and in attendance were Chief Executives of 
state-owned entities. 
10 
I can recall that I saw Matjila Koko of Eskom, 
Minister Lynne Brown and Jiyane at the Denel 
premises. 
I 
attached 
hereto 
as 
Annexure 
W2-09 
a 
printout of Google Maps travel history on my 
cell phone as confirmation that I arrived at the 
Denel offices at 09:29 and departed there at 
12:49. 
I waited in Gama’s Range Rover...” 
 
He says at 39: 
20 
“...in the parking area for the meeting to 
finish...” 
 
At 38: 
“Whilst waiting for Gama, I decided to do a 
random inspection of the vehicle. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 118 of 416 
 
Inside the boot I saw a red medical aid bag 
and decided to open it. 
To my surprise, the bag was stacked with 
R 200,00 notes.  
I 
estimated 
that 
the 
bag 
contained 
approximately R 100 000,00...” 
 
Now that W2-09, you will find at page 121.  Red 
numbers.   
MR GAMA:   121...   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will see there, Denel Dynamics, 
10 
towards the middle of the page.  Nellmapius Drive, Irene, 
Centurion.  Arriving at 09:29, leaving at 12:49.  I want you 
to comment on these three paragraphs, 36, 37 and 38. 
MR GAMA:   Ja.  My comment is as follows.  The – there 
could have been that meeting but if it was a meeting of 
state-owned enterprises, Chief Executives with the Minister 
and it was also normally between – with the Minister and 
the chairpersons of those SOE’s.  The presence of Jiyane 
is odd because Jiyane is not – or was not an SOE, Chief 
Executive.  He worked at Transnet but he was not the Head 
20 
of Transnet.   
 
So that on its own, I think for him it gives some 
kind of a flavour but he would not have been invited to 
those meetings.  So I do not know if there was such a 
meeting, why he thinks that Jiyane would have been 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 119 of 416 
 
present.  Again, R 200,00 notes, R 100 000,00.  It is like 
the earlier version.  He would always find R 200,00  notes 
and it is approximately R 100 000,00.   
 
And he says he has estimated.  He had all the 
time.  He could have counted it instead of estimating and 
then he can tell you it was so much.  And if there was such 
money, why did he not tell me that:  You have a windfall 
here.  Here is R 100 000,00.  Why would R 100 000,00 just 
be laying around in a car instead of being in a bank?  It 
does not make sense Chair.   
10 
 
It is – the result of what I believe a person who 
has been induced and coached to come up with some story.  
So some of the things he will come up with are things of 
real events that took place.  So he would say there was at 
a meeting at Denel.  Maybe if you go and check, maybe 
there was a meeting at Denel.  But the people that he says 
were there, they would not ordinarily be at that meeting.   
 
If you ask Minister Brown:  Did you meet Jiyane 
of Transnet?  She would tell you that:  I do not know who 
he is.  Because it was only the Chief Executives that would 
20 
go there.  If Koko was there, it is probably because he was 
the acting CEO of Eskom at the time.  So, and there would 
not be any other executive from Eskom other than the 
Chairperson of Eskom and the CEO and the Minister.   
 
So, but here, it goes to show that as – he tries 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 120 of 416 
 
to be flavourful.  He then continues to make mistakes 
because he is trying to tell – to create a believable story 
out of something that was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see, Mr Myburgh, that the witness says 
in paragraph 36:  He saw Matjila Koko of Eskom.  Now at 
Eskom you had, I guess maybe at different stages, Matjila 
Koko and I think you have Mr Collin Matjila. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am not sure where he meant Matjila 
Koko or whether he meant ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:   Mr Collin, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Collin Matjila.   
MR GAMA:   It is to clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there would need to be clarification. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When you say he was coached by 
who you think that happened?   
MR GAMA:  I have a scenario here Chair, where somebody 
resigns 
from 
an 
entity, 
Transnet 
and 
he 
leaves 
in 
20 
November of 2017.  So he writes a letter to his manager 
and he says I resign because I do not want to face a 
disciplinary hearing that I should be facing.  
 
He leaves, okay.  I do not know if he told you that 
he ran away from a disciplinary hearing from his manager, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 121 of 416 
 
but anyway he leaves in November 2017.  He then comes 
back, he says no I resigned, no I was dismissed.  You do 
not hear, you do not understand.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It might help if you started by giving the 
answer to who you think coached him.  Then if you need to 
elaborate we can take it from there, because the question 
was do you know or you have somebody that you think 
coached him.  
MR GAMA:  I would not know the present for sure, but the 
City Press reports that he met with the non-executive Chair 
10 
of Transnet, why is a close protection officer meeting with 
the non-executive Chair of Transnet, and then in there, it 
then says the non-executive Chair then refers him to Mr 
Mohammed Mohamedi to say no, he must reinstate this 
man.  
 
You reinstate somebody who appeals a dismissal.  
If there was an appeal it would have happened within the 
60 days after the dismissal.  So if he was dismissed as he 
claims, 
because 
he 
resigned 
anyway 
after 
I 
have 
mentioned that he, if he was dismissed it means that by 
20 
January 2018 he would have filed an appeal.  
 
Then we must discover that, that appeal and then 
when that appeal, then there must be a process, the 
bargaining council or where ever that it goes to and then it 
reinstates him.  This one, meets the non-executive Chair of 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 122 of 416 
 
Transnet as referred to the acting GCE of Transnet.  
 
From there it goes to the general manager that is 
dealing with labour issues and then he is re-employed 
which is, which are his words and then when he is re-
employed, it is as if okay, we have these particular issues.  
If you can give me a believable story around the person of 
Mr Gama, then maybe we can hire you.  
 
Then he proceeds to write a lot of this fiction that 
we see here today.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course you are not saying, but you will 
10 
tell me if you are saying, are you saying that is what 
happened or are you saying it is a possibility that 
something like that might have happened? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the latter? 
MR GAMA:  Yes, I am saying that is a possibility.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR GAMA:  Because what I do not understand when I read 
the newspaper and I see what is happening and these 
people have confirmed it according to the newspaper to 
20 
say this is what has happened.  Mohammed says this 
fellow was referred to me by the Chairperson of the board, 
and then I was asked to deal with this man.  
 
I 
am 
then 
saying 
was 
he 
reinstated 
as 
an 
inducement?  There was something in there, in the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 123 of 416 
 
newspaper that says he has been reinstated because that 
was long before these statements were made to the 
commission.  
 
It says he has been reinstated because he has been 
asked to say that Gama has been bribing policemen, 
money laundering and something very close to that then 
happens.  So it is not, I am not painting a story that did not 
happen.  
 
Some of the things that were said there, were 
predicted in that article and then they happened.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you.  How does one 
explain then all the details? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How does one explain all the detail? 
MR GAMA:  How does one explain the detail?  Well, here 
there is a motive.  There is an intent and person has got 
time.  I mean people who write movies, like Steven 
Spielberg, they sit and they conceive these things.  It does 
not mean that everything that we see in the movies ever 
20 
happened or is the truth.  
 
So somebody will have those kinds of things where 
they sit and they say okay, this is what we could say.  They 
try to do a story that is believable.  For instance, witness 2 
says to the Chairperson that I gave R50 000-00 but I never 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 124 of 416 
 
said anything.  
 
I never said what is the repayment period.  He says 
he assumed that that is his money, that he can take it.  It 
is all fiction Chair.  Who gives you money and never says 
anything?   
CHAIRPERSON:  If I understand his version, it was not a 
loan.  There was enough money and you were just giving 
him money.  There was enough money, there was no 
problem.  R50 000-00 was not a problem. 
MR GAMA:  Ja, but who gives money, does not say and he 
10 
makes the assumption okay no, this is my money.  As you 
say money is no problem.  Let me take it.  If indeed such 
has happened and then I said one day okay, can I have my 
money back.  What was he going to do.  
 
If he is somebody who is used to being given money 
to do things.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, as I understand his version, at 
least the context, he seems to have made it clear to him 
that you were just giving him money which he could use as 
he so fits.  That is my understanding of his version.  As I 
20 
say, because there was money, money was not a problem. 
MR GAMA:  Money was not a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  So you get given money, you ask no questions.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You take the money. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 125 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  You take the money.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR GAMA:  And you go to [indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see Mr Gama, I suppose it is 
something that we are going to unpack in more detail in 
time, but what you are doing, you are dealing with this 
what might be described as the ordinary course.  Evidence 
is going to be led in this commission shortly that at the 
Guptas they had a cash dispensing machine.  
10 
MR GAMA:  Cash? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  A cash dispensing machine, an ATM 
machine.  
MR GAMA:  Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You have also heard evidence that Mr 
Singh for example had eight safety deposit boxes at Knox 
Volt.  Evidence is going to be heard in this commission that 
Mr Peter, his replacement and the your chief financial 
officer he had or his mother had seven safe deposit boxes 
at Knox Ville.  
20 
 
Evidence has been led by drivers that cash was 
stored there.  This is not an ordinary situation we are 
dealing with.  One thing that it is not ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Sorry, you say there was an ATM machine? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 126 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  Okay.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And this commission has heard a raft 
of evidence about there being lots and lots of cash used by 
many, many a senior executive.  So what it perhaps turns 
on is how many occasions you went to the Guptas.  You 
say you only went there once.  
MR GAMA:  That is correct.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let us deal then with having dealt 
with the red medical aid bag.  Let us deal with random 
collections of cash at page 97.  I recall occasions where 
10 
cash amounts were given to Gama at random places.  Cash 
collected at, is that [indistinct].   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh, do not forget 
what you want to put to him.  Let me go back to the issue 
of witness 2 and his version against your version.  Was 
there a time when you and witness 2 had issues between 
the two of you while he was one of your drivers?   
MR GAMA:  Well Chair, the statements that witness 2 
wrote would indicate those issues.  That there were issues 
yes.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what I am looking at is I know he 
said you accused him of stealing money from the bag but 
you said there was no such.  So I am asking from your own 
version whether the two of you ever had any issues while 
he was your drivers to [indistinct] 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 127 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes, that is correct Chair, but it was not about 
money.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It was not about money? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There were some issues but not about 
money? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Now the reason why I am 
asking is because you said that he may have been induced 
with something, it seems to me you suggest at work, at 
10 
Transnet, to effectively fabricate stories about you.  Did I 
understand you correctly? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So what I wanted to find out was 
whether your position is that to the extent that he makes 
allegations against you which you say are false, you say 
he is fabricating because he must have been induced to do 
that against you or whether he might have some grudge 
against you as well, and there might have been some 
issues that you say would drive him to falsely implicate you 
20 
in all kinds of things.  
 
So that is what I want to establish.  Whether it is 
only the issue of inducement or whether you say there 
were some issues also between the two of you which you 
think may have driven him to fabricate stories against you. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 128 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay I see the sun is giving you a 
problem.  The sun light is giving you a problem. 
MR GAMA:  Let me just move a little bit Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but there are certain issues which 
you think ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Yes, there are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which drive him to, drove him to 
fabricate some stories about you. 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  At some stage I guess we 
can hear about that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Perhaps we should deal with it now.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, maybe ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson if it is a convenient 
point.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know if something can be done, 
but I can see you are having a problem with the, is it the 
sunlight that ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  Ja, it is just ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Shedding light on your evidence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that something that can be dealt with 
or not?  Oh, okay alright.  Let us try and continue in the 
meantime but they will attend to it.  Okay.  so I think Mr 
Myburgh says well, maybe let us hear about those issues 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 129 of 416 
 
that you say may have driven the witness to fabricate 
stories about you. 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  Chair, I think witness 2 is aggrieved.  He 
is aggrieved because he believes that if it was not because 
of me he would not have resigned.  He claims that I made 
life unbearable for him and that caused him to resign from 
the company. 
 
But what we are dealing with here Chair, is 
somebody who committed acts of dishonesty.  You are 
dealing with someone, if it was in the army, someone who 
10 
could have been court marshalled, because if somebody is 
assigned to protect their principle, and goes and does 
something which is counter to that, it is like when you do 
not follow the code.  
 
When your principle is threatened, you should be 
the first person who goes to your principle and say there is 
a threat and this is what we are going to deal with.  This is 
a person Chair, who when the threat came through did not 
go to the principle to say there is a threat.  
 
It was when I subsequently discovered through 
20 
camera footage that certain things had happened.  I then 
asked his manager.  I said look, this is what has happened 
and I see this fellow doing one, two, three.  Can you find 
out?   
 
It was only after that, that he then came out and he 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 130 of 416 
 
said to the, to his manager yes, it did happen.  It happened 
like this and like this and like this, but in that statement 
that he wrote, he still lied about it.  He still made it as if he 
volunteered the information when he did not.  
 
But also I would not have seen it if he actually had 
not committed.  If there was no commission of that act, but 
he committed that act which is why I was able to then ask 
his manager and then it was on that basis that his manager 
had then said look, your integrity is questionable.  
 
It would appear that you did not take the steps that 
10 
you ought to have taken to protect the principle and then 
he moved him from me pending an investigation and then 
subsequent to that, you will see it comes through in his 
statement.  
 
He then had this grudge that he claims that his life 
was made miserable.  Because of what he had done and 
therefore he had to leave and I think in his own words he 
then says this was the culmination of somebody that I had 
worked for, very well for many years, but after that after 
that incident Chair, then the dishonesty, the lack of 
20 
integrity was then covered and the falsities, the lies that 
he then made to cover that event, because he had been 
given the opportunity to come clean.  
 
All that he was supposed to have done was 
supposed to be able to come clean and say this is what 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 131 of 416 
 
happened, but still even in that statement, he tried to 
mislead and misrepresent what had actually happened and 
as a result of that, I then felt that look, I cannot have this 
person.  
 
So whatever it is that his manager then did was an 
enquiry that tried to deal with that issue because he was 
saying as a protection officer your first duty is to protect 
your principle, but in terms of what you did, you actually 
conspired with other people against your principle.  
 
So this is the kind of person that we are dealing 
10 
with and therefore yes, he holds a grudge that he was 
going to be disciplined and he decided to resign although 
he claims also that he was dismissed.  His story, but what I 
do know is that I was told that he resigned and left and 
that was prior to whatever disciplinary hearing that he was 
supposed to have had.  
 
Therefore, as a result of that, when I even talk 
about the inducement, is to then say we can reinstate you 
but we want you to tell these kinds of tails, ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh?   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Let us carry on at page 
9011. 
 At 
paragraph 
39 
under 
the 
heading 
random 
collections of cash: 
“I can recall occasions where cash amounts 
were given to Gama at random places.  Cash 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 132 of 416 
 
collected at the Buli College in Midrand. 
Sometime during 2016 Gama and I were on our 
way to his home in Pony Lane in Midrand.  On 
our way Gama asked me to stop at the 
entrance to the Buli College in Midrand which 
is not far from his house.” 
Now am I pronouncing that correctly?   
 
Is there such a college close to your house? 
MR GAMA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  At 41: 
10 
 
“On our arrival ...” 
 
I presume it should be at the college: 
 
“I noticed Giyane’s Mercedes Benz GL parked 
at the entrance.  Giyane got out of his car and 
handed a wine box which was sealed with cello 
tape to Gama.  The box was very heavy and 
did not feel as if it contained bottles.  I 
suspected that the box contained money.” 
 
You want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:  Ja, first and foremost I mean there was no 
20 
such box that I met with Giyane about, and if he says there 
was a box and it contained money and then he says it was 
very heavy, I do not know what is heavy between bottles 
and pieces of paper which is money.  
 
If he says it was very heavy, I do not think that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 133 of 416 
 
bottles with wine in them would be lighted but there was no 
such thing that happened.  What happened in Buli College, 
Giyane used to work in Pretoria.  There was a re-
organisation at Transnet.  
 
I was able to meet each and every one of the 
executives face to face and there was a letter that I 
needed to hand over to him and he had asked that after 
hours, because he was not available, that if I could give 
him the letter, he will come and meet me on my way home, 
and that is what happened. 
10 
 
I actually gave him that letter.  So and there was 
not a box that Giyane gave me.  There was a letter, an 
official letter that I gave to Giyane at Buli College in 2016.  
I think it would have been around May of 2016 when this 
re-organisation took place.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you were driven there by witness 
2? 
MR GAMA:  Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You were driven there by witness 2.   
MR GAMA:  Yes, I was going home.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And Giyane was there in his 
Mercedes Benz GL. 
MR GAMA:  I do not know.  I do not know the kind of car.  I 
need to pay attention to these kind of things.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You had an impressive array of 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 134 of 416 
 
vehicles Mr Gama, I would have thought you would have 
been able to tell us.  
MR GAMA:  No, I think Mr Myburgh you may be getting it 
wrong.  People will say you have an impressive array of 
cars.  They are old cars, they are 12, 13, 14 years old.  So 
when I have a car, I do not sell car.  I will have my 
instalment sale agreement for five years.   
 
Then unless I need to buy another car I keep the 
car.  I even have a 30 year old car that I have been 
driving.  It is not, it is not a flashy life style or anything of 
10 
that nature, but a GL to me is like an ML, and I have not 
seen Giyane drive a GL, but maybe he does have.  
 
I do not know.  I thought I have seen him drive a 
car, maybe a C something.  So, a GL, I think a GL is like 
an ML.  It is these big cars.  I do not know.  I do not think 
there is such a thing.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You do not think there is such a 
thing?   
MR GAMA:  The car that he was driving, but maybe he 
was, but I have seen him drive a Mercedes, but a private 
20 
car, a sedan.  Four, five seater.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright, and then under the heading 
cash collected on the N17 highway near Springs.  42: 
 
“On a Friday evening some time in 2017 I went 
to Gama’s residence in Pony Lane Midrand 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 135 of 416 
 
where I collected a new Mercedes Benz S65 
from the premises which he had booked out 
earlier from a dealership as a test vehicle.” 
 
Do you want to comment on that? 
MR GAMA:  No, he did not.  He did not go to my residence.   
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
You 
had 
not 
booked 
out 
...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  To collect such a car.  It is not true.  
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
Had 
you 
not 
booked 
out 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR GAMA:  No.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   A new Mercedes Benz S65 as a test 
vehicle? 
MR GAMA:  Well, the first thing is they do not give you a 
new car.  A demo car is a demo, it is not new.  But he did 
not fetch it from home.  I asked him to pick it up in 
Woodmead.  So it is not true.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you had then booked out, let me 
get the language right, a demo Mercedes Benz S65.   
MR GAMA:  Yes, I wanted to test drive it.   
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you asked him to collect it in 
Midrand, not from your house? 
MR GAMA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I see.  
MR GAMA:  Here in Woodmead. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 136 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  43: 
 
“From Pony Lane I proceeded ...” 
MR GAMA:  Where he says he proceeded to Woodmead is 
where he picked the car.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry: 
 
“From Pony Lane I proceeded to a shopping 
centre in Woodmead and you say that is where 
he picked up the car, where I met a close 
friend of Gama and Giyane’s driver in the 
parking area of the shopping centre.  Gama’s 
10 
close friend got into the S65 with me whilst 
Giyane’s driver departed in another direction.” 
 
Shall I finish this whole part and then you comment 
on it, or would you prefer to comment ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:  I think it is easier if you just ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR GAMA:  Went through all of it, so that we do not 
...[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay. 
MR GAMA:  Because it is, it can be tiring and the water is 
20 
getting finished.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Paragraph 44: 
 
“From the shopping centre ...” ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you must say when you run out of 
water.  They will give you more water.  Are you running out 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 137 of 416 
 
of it?   
MR GAMA:  No, no I still have.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Paragraph 44: 
“From the shopping centre Gama’s close friend and 
I proceeded to the N17 highway where just after the 
first tollgate towards Springs, I pulled over to the 
shoulder of the road.  At that spot, two other 
vehicles also arrived and parked on the shoulder of 
the road.  The one vehicle was an Audi with witness 
10 
1 as the driver and Gama as the passenger.  The 
other vehicle was a Mercedes Benz GL with Giyane 
as the driver.” 
45: 
“Gama got out of the Audi and I got out of the S65.  
Gama then got into the driver ’s seat of the S65, 
where he joined his close friend.  Giyane also got 
out of his vehicle and he walked over to the driver 
side of the S65 where he handed a big packet, 
which I assume contained cash, in my presence to 
20 
Gama.” 
46: 
“In the meantime witness 1 left the scene with the 
Audi and Giyane left shortly afterwards.” 
47: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 138 of 416 
 
“Also in the meantime another PCO arrived in a 
Toyota Corolla with whom I had arranged to pick me 
up at that location. 
48: 
“I wish to state that all the arrangements as 
described above were in Gama’s instructions.” 
MR GAMA:   Thank you.  So this is a very simple thing 
where I needed to test drive this vehicle and I was going to 
KZN, so we met there.  So again, real events but with 
flavour.  I do not recall Jiyane there.  I do not recall – I do 
10 
not know about this Jiyane’s driver, I am going to have to 
maybe try and – maybe they should give an affidavit in 
terms of whether they were there. 
 
So there would not have been any big packets that 
was – so let us assume there was a packet of money that 
somebody needed to give me, why would you convoy bring 
two, three cars and then you give the person there?  It 
does not make sense.  But there was not any of that, there 
was no packet of money that as being given.  He says 
there were two cars that arrived, one was witness 1 and 
20 
the other one was Jiyane.   
I do not recall a lot of these intricate things that 
happened but what I do know is there was no packet of 
money or he says he assumed it contained cash.  There 
was no such.  We exchanged cars, I had to travel and I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 139 of 416 
 
travelled. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So could you just explain what 
actually did happen here?  So you test drove this S65 and 
at a point you then got out of it and got into your car which 
– let me understand what happened. 
MR GAMA:   No, no, no, the test driving was going to take 
place after he brought the car.  He brought the car.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right and then? 
MR GAMA:   To where we met, it was next to the tollgate, 
very close to the tollgate from the N17, I cannot remember, 
10 
I think it is called Rifles something.  He brought the car 
because I was in a meeting elsewhere.   
Witness 1, as he calls him, brought me to that place 
so that I could get onto the car and then I would have 
thought that he then got into the car with witness 1 and 
where his car was that he says someone else came to pick 
him up.  It was not such an intricate thing as it is now 
being painted, it was really just to say go and fetch this 
car, do not come back on the N1 because it is going to be 
traffic and I want to travel when there is still a bit of light. 
20 
Witness 1 is going to bring me from the meeting 
that I was at and then I can take the car and drive.  It was 
not all of these intricate things that the flavour demands 
that they should... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alight.  And then under the heading: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 140 of 416 
 
“Breakdown in relationship...” 
I think you have already touched on this. 
“...with Gama and dismissal.” 
He says at 49: 
“During August 2017 my relationship with Gama 
became strained as I did not get along with Gama’s 
close friend referred to in paragraph 24 above, the 
reason being that over time she more and more 
insisted that I assist her with private business and 
to undertake non-work related trips for her.  I 
10 
refused to adhere to her requests as I felt that she 
was abusing my services as CPO for Gama for her 
own selfish cause.  Gama did not take kind to my 
attitude towards his close friend.” 
15 
My relationship with Gama reached breakpoint in  
November 2017 when Gama and his close friend 
accused me of sprinkling muti in and around their 
house and being involved with witchcraft.  Nothing 
could be further from the truth of this.  On 17 
November 2017 I resigned from Transnet as I could 
20 
not 
tolerate 
Gama’s 
accusations 
and 
attitude 
towards me any longer.  Despite having resigned as 
stated above, Transnet continued with disciplinary 
proceedings against me on 6 December in my 
absence and I was summarily dismissed.  The 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 141 of 416 
 
charges against me inter alia entailed that I had 
betrayed the trust relationship with Gama and that I 
sprinkled 
an 
unknown 
substance 
at 
Gama’s 
residence thereby putting his and his family’s lives 
into danger. 
53. 
I 
subsequently 
approached 
Transnet 
to 
seek 
redress due to the fact that I believed that I was 
treated unfairly, that I was victimised and eventually 
unfairly dismissed on Gama’s instruction. 
54. 
After due consideration Transnet agreed that I was 
10 
unfairly dismissed.  I was therefore reinstated to 
the position of CPO with effect from 1 December 
2019 retrospective from 1 January 2018.” 
Now these are things that you I think have touched on 
already, what other comments do you have? 
MR GAMA:   Chair, probably this is at the nub of why we 
are having this discussion today.  At paragraph 49 there is 
a whole lot of lies, there was no such that took place but 
he is prefacing it in this fashion so that there seems to 
have been something untoward that had happened.  He 
20 
then says at paragraph …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, so are you saying that where 
he says that your close friend used to make demands in 
effect for him to do non-work related tasks or trips for her 
and that this then strained the relationship between you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 142 of 416 
 
and him, that is witness 2, you say there is no such thing? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I just wanted to be sure, 
ja, of what you are saying.  Okay, continued, ja. 
MR GAMA:   So paragraph 50 where he says it reached 
breakpoint, the breakpoint is not in November, Chair, it is 
in August when it happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of 2017? 
MR GAMA:   That is correct.  Where I observed these 
things on the camera.  I then approached his manager to 
10 
say this is what I have observed, can you find out from him 
what is it exactly that he was doing?  And then he wrote a 
statement to say this had been given to him by someone 
that I knew to sprinkle …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now is that sprinkling something?  Is 
that what you observed? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, that is what I observed, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You observed him sprinkling something 
around your house. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   It was a brown powder in terms of the 
statement that he wrote. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
MR GAMA:   That he had been given this brown powder. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 143 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR GAMA:   But he then says no, he never came with it to 
the house, that he threw it away in the freeway but I 
observed him sprinkling this there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On cameras? 
MR GAMA:   On the cameras. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   And then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would this have been during the day?  
Would it have been during the evening? 
10 
MR GAMA:   Night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he sprinkled it according to what 
you observed or it …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   It was at night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was at night? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR GAMA:   And then I had not been aware that he was 
there, it was one of these things that I talk about, that 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so in terms of – as far as you were 
concerned you did not expect to be in your house. 
MR GAMA:   He was not supposed to be there.  Ja, he 
came there [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He came there? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 144 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   [indistinct] at night. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR GAMA:   By cover of night and hoping that… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright, continue? 
MR GAMA:   Yes.  So then he writes the statement to say 
who gave it to him but then in his statement he then says 
no, he never – he was asked to go and sprinkle it but he 
never sprinkled it.  So I am saying then if he never 
sprinkled why then did I see in the cameras because I 
would never have asked him, I would have never asked for 
10 
the investigation to say there is something with this fellow 
and there are these things that are happening.  I would not 
have known if he threw in the freeway as he claims 
because he wrote a statement, Chair, where he says no, I 
threw it away in the  - on the freeway.  But then I see this 
thing and it was a vicious thing, you know, to have many 
prayers to deal with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he acknowledged that he had been – 
that the cameras correctly captured him, he was at the time 
– the cameras showed him to have been there and he just 
20 
denied – he denied what it was that he was sprinkling or 
there was no denial, it was [indistinct – dropping voice]  or 
what was the position? 
MR GAMA:   So this is where the dishonesty is, Chair.  So 
I raise this issue because of what I have observed.  He 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 145 of 416 
 
then denied that it happened, that he sprinkled anything.  
He then says no, he did have something that he was sent 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To sprinkle. 
MR GAMA:   To sprinkle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But did not sprinkle. 
MR GAMA:   In the statement, ja, he says but he did not 
sprinkle.  But if he had not sprinkled it, I would not have 
seen him sprinkling, I would not have asked the question.  
If he had received and really thrown away this thing on the 
10 
freeway, I was not with him when he was on the freeway 
when he was supposed to have thrown it away but because 
he did not throw it away, he then captured – he gets 
captured by the camera doing this thing.  So he writes 
about it to say no, so and so gave it to me and said this is 
what I must do and then he then claims no, but I did not do 
it.  Then why would I ask if he had not done it?  So that is 
the other thing.  So I then say to his manager look, just do 
not assign him to me because as you can see, he admits 
that something like this happened but he now tries -  he 
20 
creates another flavour of it to say no, it did not happen in 
this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I interrupted you while you were 
dealing with this.  I do not know if you have finished.   
MR GAMA:   Yes, so if I then move to 51, Chair.  He says 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 146 of 416 
 
he resigned because he could not tolerate my accusations.   
The accusation happened once, he admitted to it in a 
statement.  You know, he talks about an attitude.  He was 
no longer working with me so I do not know what he talks 
about but I think that then becomes the source of – so you 
now have somebody with a grudge against you, somebody 
that used to work with you very closely that you no longer 
trust, that now has a grudge against you and has become 
an enemy because he now things that he lost his job 
because of you.  That is really what we are dealing with 
10 
here. 
I am not terribly familiar with all of those issues but 
the betrayal of trust, that is actually what it was and the 
putting me into danger also because this was a very toxic 
thing that I really do not understand but you cross that 
area you [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Am I right to say you suspected or 
believed that what he did was connected with witchcraft? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I did not have to suspect, he told me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR GAMA:   It is in her statement, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  How did he put it? 
MR GAMA:   Oh, I have got it, I have got it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You have got his statement? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, Chair. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 147 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so you can make arrangements to 
share it with the Commission.  
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR GAMA:   Then you can read it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I would just like to take you to 
two last paragraphs please.  Page 100, paragraph 58, 
under the heading: Risk and security concerns, says: 
“In 
exposing 
Gama’s 
apparent 
inappropriate 
10 
conduct in the statement I believe that my and my 
family’s safety and security may come under threat.  
It is worthy to note that a few days after my 
resignation 
in 
November 
I 
noticed 
on 
two 
consecutive days drones hovering above my house.  
Although I cannot say with certainty I believe that 
Gama may have been behind these incidents in 
attempts to victimise and intimidate me.  I am 
further aware that my manager, witness 1, had 
received threats on his cellular phone to the effect 
20 
that he should not cooperate with the Zondo 
Commission in relation to allegations of improper 
conduct by executives of Transnet which is of great 
concern.” 
Do you want to comment on that? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 148 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   I have no reason to threaten witness 1 or – I 
mean, witness 2.  I do not know how to procure drones to – 
I just suspect that his citing of drones is also a figment of 
his imagination.  I am not behind any attempts to intimidate 
him, I do not do that, I pray for him every day but I do not 
– I have no reason to hire drones or try to intimidate or 
threaten him.  He knows himself where he is, he knows the 
truth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then finally paragraph 59: 
10 
“I am furthermore concerned that although Gama is 
no longer with Transnet he may still have influence 
over executives and senior managers at Transnet 
and that I may be subjected to further victimisation 
by individuals loyal to him.” 
Do you want to deal with that? 
MR GAMA:   Innuendo, conjecture, there is nothing that I 
can say to those kinds of things, it is his belief system.  I 
am not there, there is no such but I think the issue of 
whether he would be seen to be trustworthy or loyal 
20 
towards his principals by other colleagues in the security 
industry is something that he should himself think about 
because where somebody can be creative and make lies 
about their principals, I think everybody – it is something 
that he should have thought about before he starts the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 149 of 416 
 
inventions and the flavour. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, Mr Gama, I just want to point out 
something to you.  Can you go to page …[intervenes] 
MR GAMA:   Perhaps before you do, Chair? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, sure. 
MR GAMA:   I do not know if it would be – I do not know 
what time it is, I do not keep a watch but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is about ten to four. 
MR GAMA:   If we could take a short …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A short adjournment. 
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, we normally take it at 
four so we may as well take it now.  It will be a ten minutes 
adjournment.  I think, Mr Myburgh, we would start with the 
next stream. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the same stream but maybe at five? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I have got – on this score I have got 
literally two more questions or three more questions to ask 
Mr Gama to finish on this. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   On this one, yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Solomons just Whatsapped me to 
find out whether we are on for four o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The remote link is in the process of 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 150 of 416 
 
being established. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well what I have in mind is that we 
should go on with Mr Gama to five. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Fair enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the evening session we always 
say they must arrive at four, be ready. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we are done with the day witness then 
we start.  If not, we start at five.  Okay, alright, we will 
adjourn for ten minutes.  We adjourn. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama I just wanted to take you, if 
I may, to page 94 of Witness 2’s statement or affidavit.  
From what I can see Witness 2 only ever uses three 
specific dates, he talks of the collection on the 13 t h of June 
2017, you see that, then over the page ...[intervenes]  
MR GAMA:   Page 94? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   94, red numbering.   He speaks of a 
20 
collection on 13 June 2017, we have been over this, and 
over the page a collection on the 13 t h of July 2017 and 
then the third time that he uses a specific date is in 
paragraph 36 he speaks of you having been at a meeting at 
Denel on the 20 t h of April 2017, but we know that’s not 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 151 of 416 
 
contentious because you accept that.  So, the two dates, 
events in relation to the 13 t h of June and the 13 t h of July 
are contentious but, on both occasions, you have, via the 
information 
that 
has 
been 
provided 
to 
you 
by 
the 
Commission, been able to source minutes of meetings, a 
special meeting of the Board of Directors and then a 
meeting of the TNPA which, on your version establishes 
your defence, is that correct? 
MR 
GAMA: 
 
 
I 
think 
that’s 
a 
legal 
term, 
establishes…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your explanation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Your explanation, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or your side of the story about whatever 
allegation he makes. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, if you could then go, please to 
your affidavit and can I take you to paragraph 7 at page 
250.2.6.4. paragraph 7 you say, 
“The legal team of the Commission – as the legal 
20 
team of the Commission is well aware, I entertained 
the thought of causing witness 2 to be cross-
examined and in this context, I requested the 
Commission to provide me with my diaries spanning 
the period relevant to the testimony of witness 2.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 152 of 416 
 
To date such access has not been provided, sub-
two, any attempt at causing the effect of cross-
examination of witness 2 is dependent on and will 
be 
premised 
upon 
demonstrating 
that 
I 
was, 
physically, not in attendance and/or in the company 
of witness 2 when certain meetings transpired, and 
cash was conveyed as he alleges but rather that I 
was elsewhere and potentially in the company of 
other persons.  The Commission’s legal team’s 
failure to provide access to my diary has prejudiced 
10 
me and deprives me of my ability to test the 
evidence of witness 2 through cross-examination”, 
 
Now, if necessary, we can put up an affidavit 
dealing with this but Mr Gama, you will know, and this has 
been placed on record before that what the Commission 
has provided you with is electronic data that would make 
up a diary, from January 2012 until September 2018, in fact 
there were over 14 000 records that were provided to you, 
we went through this last time, Mr Benjamin, in fact 
delivered this on a flash disk to your attorneys.  I would 
20 
just ask you, also, to confirm that when you gave evidence 
on the 11 t h of March my investigators actually sat with your 
attorney and demonstrated how you could recreate your 
diary with reference to that electronic information, would 
you confirm that, on the 11 t h of March? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 153 of 416 
 
MR GAMA:   Yes, except that it doesn’t recreate a diary 
and I think I’ve been at pains to explain to Mr Myburgh, 
and I think I explained earlier this morning that what this 
does, I think you call it electronic data, I’m looking for a 
diary I don’t have a diary.  The electronic data gives you 
50 to 60% of information that you would ordinarily find in 
the proper diary.  So, we have used the information that we 
have been given to the extent that we can.  So, it doesn’t 
give us the kind of information that we wanted and that’s 
why we have sought to resort, now, to meeting minutes and 
10 
those kinds of things just to show and demonstrate that 
some of these things, when they are alleged to have 
happened, that I was not even at the places where witness 
2 says that I have been.  so, I know from the interaction 
between myself and my legal team and the legal team and 
the Commission’s legal team that the 14 000 records, as it 
were, provide electronic data but they don’t provide a 
diary.  So, I think it’s something which we’ve gradually had 
to accept that, that’s what it is, it’s not the diary as we 
would know it because we believe that, if it was actually 
20 
the diary itself, I think it would have been much, much 
better.  For instance, there are these two or three dates 
that have been given but we don’t have any of the other 
dates where he says certain things could have happened or 
that could have been useful…[intervenes]. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 154 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama only three specific dates 
are given and your case in respect of two of them lies in 
the minutes which you tracked using the data that was 
given to you and you’ve actually shown the Chairperson 
one of these schedules that none of us can read and you 
say, well that shows me, that I was in a meeting with the 
Chairperson of the Board. 
MR GAMA:   Yes, and I’ve indicated to you what it shows, 
it’s the meeting requests.  So, it says so and so need a 
meeting request for these people, for a meeting to take 
10 
place at such and such a day.  The way that it works, you 
have to go into a specific date, look for those things but 
sometimes it doesn’t tell you where the meetings were and 
the only reason you are able to get the meetings and find 
out where they were is if there’s minutes that took place.  
Certain times you can have a meeting somewhere and 
there are no minutes that were taken because it was not a 
formal, you know, meeting.  So, I think that is the 
issue…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s a hardcopy that you are looking for 
20 
or? 
MR GAMA:   I’m trying to remember what this thing was 
called 
on 
the 
diary, 
it’s 
a 
Microsoft, 
exchange 
is 
it…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I take it that it’s something that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 155 of 416 
 
people in the Commission is not in possession of, whatever 
it is you are looking for? 
MR GAMA:   They are unable to procure it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GAMA:   They’ve tried. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, has Transnet said they don’t have it 
as well, Mr Myburgh, do you know? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has Transnet said they don’t have it as 
well? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, they have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They have ja so I just wanted to make 
sure that if there is a complaint against the Commission it 
would be addressed but you say Mr Gama also confirms 
that he accepts that the Commission doesn’t have it, 
obviously if the Commission had it, it probably would  have 
no reason not to give him.  So, the position is simply – is 
the position, Mr Gama that you simply – you are simply 
lamenting the absence of that diary without blaming 
anybody…[intervenes]? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, I do not wish to apportion blame, 
I know that the team has – all I say is that the 
Commission’s legal team has also failed to find it for me, 
but I know that they tried so maybe it’s just the manner and 
way in which we write it in English yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 156 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay, 
alright 
okay 
that’s 
fine…[intervenes]. 
MR GAMA:   So, I’m not saying that it’s because of a lack 
of trying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR GAMA:   And so, I’m saying, what we have gives us 
something. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but not everything? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, but it doesn’t give us everything it gives 
us 50 to 60% of what diaries would have been used for. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, well maybe I may as well 
mention this, Mr Gama, now that we’re talking about this.  
To the extent that anybody, witness, whether it’s somebody 
implicated, wrongdoing or not, if they have got concerns 
we are quite happy for them to articulate those concerns 
and my attitude is that, we must look at those concerns 
and be able to say, we have looked at this, has got merit, 
this is what should happen, address it, this maybe we don’t 
agree it’s got no merit but if people have got concerns let 
them articulate them and then we look at them, we come 
20 
back to them and say, this is our response.  So that is part 
of the reason why I wanted to know about this diary even 
earlier, okay. 
MR GAMA:   Ja, I’m not asking the Commission to still 
continue trying, I think they’ve tried, so we are saying – 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 157 of 416 
 
we’re just lamenting the fact that what we intended to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR GAMA:   We wanted to cross-examine the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But Mr Gama that – I’m afraid I don’t 
understand why you can’t cross-examine the witness with 
reference to the minutes of the meeting on the 13 t h of June 
and the minutes of the meeting on the 13 t h of July, just as 
you’ve articulated your case here. 
MR GAMA:   I think we could argue this ad infinitum Chair, 
10 
I have no intention to – I can’t take it further. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   As I understand it, you in fact, with 
reference to the electronic information that the Commission 
provided you with, you were able to work out that on the 
13 t h of June you were at the special Board meeting and on 
the 13 t h of July you were at a meeting on the – with the 
TNPA and that then caused you or your attorneys to ask 
the Commission to produce these two sets of minutes.  
SG2 and 3 isn’t that correct? 
MR GAMA:   Yes, but it might not be – it may not have 
20 
reflected everything that happened on that particular day. 
For instance, with what we have, I couldn’t be able to tell 
you why I was delayed for two hours at the meeting of the 
TNPA, but my diary probably would have done that. So, 
this is something – it’s a useful tool but it doesn’t achieve, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 158 of 416 
 
completely, the objectives for which I wanted the diary for. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Of course, the point of contention 
there is not your time of arrival at the meeting, it’s your 
time of departure and you say that can be determined with 
reference to the minutes. 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then just to complete this, so we 
gave you that demonstration on the 11 t h of March then on 
the 18 t h of March, and you’ve explained how this came 
about with reference to the information the Commission 
10 
had given you, Mr Khan…[intervenes]. 
MR GAMA:   Sorry, can you repeat that, sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   On the 11 t h of March we gave you a 
demonstration, on the 18 t h of March Mr Khan requested the 
Commission to provide you with these two sets of minutes 
and that – I’m sorry that was on the 17 t h on March and on 
the 18 t h of March Mr Benjamin provided them. You want to 
see the email string, or will you take my word for it, here it 
is? 
MR GAMA:   Well, I don’t know where we are going to with 
20 
this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Quite simple Mr Gama, the 
information that you gave it’s – the information that you 
were provided with you used it to establish that you were 
in these two meetings and you asked us to provide you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 159 of 416 
 
with the minutes and we provided them to you within one 
day. 
MR GAMA:   And? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You accept that? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That answer was yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama I’d like to turn to a 
different topic, and I would like to…[intervenes]. 
MR GAMA:   I’m sorry the document that has been given to 
10 
him must he slot it in somewhere in the bundle or? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I don’t think it’s necessary DCJ, if 
the chronology is accepted by Mr Gama, that on the 17 t h a 
request was made by his attorney for the two sets of 
minutes and on the 18 t h of March the Commission provided 
his attorney with the two sets and those are the minutes 
that then, are next to his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gama, what I would like to do – 
because it becomes important for many of the topics that 
20 
we’re going to address in due course is to look at your role 
in relation to the 1064 locomotives and perhaps you could 
assist us with working out exactly how you fitted in, what 
role you played from the beginning to the end.  Is it my 
understanding that in all of your interactions in relation to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 160 of 416 
 
the 1064 locomotives, and there’s part of your affidavit that 
I’ll take you to, you were, at all times the Chief Executive 
of Transnet Freight Rail? 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then – in fact, let me correct 
myself right towards the end you took certain decisions, as 
I recall, you were at the helm for example when the 
relocation was dealt with and you were also at the helm 
when the club loan was secured, does that accord with 
your recollection?  So that would have been in 2015?  
10 
MR GAMA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, could you just explain to the 
Chairperson from the beginning, how this unfolded, the 
1064 locomotives, your role in it, your role in the business 
case, your role in the post tender negotiations, your role in 
the increase in the ETC, from the beginning to the end, to 
what you were members of sub-committees’ etcetera? 
MR GAMA:   Okay, do you have a reference that we can 
use like my affidavit to deal with that issue? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The difficulty with that is that it’s 
20 
dealt with sort of pitted if you know what I mean, in a 
sense that, for example, if you look at page 250.1.33 you 
talk there, about the business case and the handing over 
of the business case.  Is that a convenient place to start or 
do you want to start earlier, dealing with the market 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 161 of 416 
 
demand strategy etcetera? 
MR GAMA:   That’s fine, I could give you a broad brush 
and maybe what – what could assist the Commission on 
these matters is an understanding of the decision making 
process and then we can go into – I think there are three 
things that we need to understand about any – of these 
decisions.  Whether it’s the 1064, the 100, 95 any 
investment decision.  The first thing is that there is an 
investment case that is made which is a business case for 
the investment to be made which is called the investing 
10 
decision and that investing decision is normally taken in a 
context where a number the  of assumptions must be made 
and what I’ve seen a lot here happen is that there then 
became a marriage between the assumptions and the 
investing decision in terms of what then happened and 
then when people wanted to make certain comparisons 
they failed to get out of the post in terms of the investing 
decision and the investment case, Chair.   
So, as with the case with the 1064 – so there was 
an investment decision that was made that the 1064 
20 
locomotive that must be purchased but even that, before 
you got to it, as Mr Myburgh indicates, Transnet had a 
locomotive lead plan, there was a market demand strategy 
which gave the context to it.  The market demand strategy 
said, how do we meet the demands of the market without 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 162 of 416 
 
looking at the constraints that we as Transnet have in 
terms of how to finance a capital investment programme. 
So, I’ll come back to that, the second decision is the 
procurement decision.  The procurement decision is when 
you go out to the market and you start the process to find 
bidders that can supply you with this equipment. So, in this 
case, we are talking about locomotives.   
That process is a very separate process from the 
investment decision and typically the procurement decision 
takes place after the investment decision has been made 
10 
or simultaneously in terms of long lead procurement 
processes such as – for infrastructure or for locomotive.  
The procurement decision is then premised on how you call 
for proposals, how you adjudicate, how you qualify and 
disqualify, what are the financial, technical, commercial 
criteria that are measured in order to arrive at an 
adjudicated decision and then the third decision is the 
financing decision.  The financing decision talks to how are 
you going to finance the capital investment programme.  
The programme is the whole programme so if you have the 
20 
MTS, you have the whole programme but the projects 
within the programme and the capital programme. So, there 
are various projects, and they are closely intertwined 
because for certain of these things if you do certain things 
here you must also do certain things there so that you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 163 of 416 
 
have a complete picture in terms of the – what Mr 
…[indistinct – dropped voice]. 
The financing decision talks to whether you are 
going to finance in-house, from your own cash flow, all of 
the capital or whether you are going to borrow some of the 
money, and it also takes into account the period within 
which you are going to …[indistinct] the assets.  So, for 
instance you cannot go for a bank overdraft if you are 
going to finance an asset that has an asset lifecycle of 20 
or 30 years, so then you try to match your asset that you 
10 
are 
acquiring 
with 
the 
financial 
instrument 
that 
is 
commiserate with that.  There is a delineation in Transnet 
in terms of who does what. So, for me as a lowly railway 
man who is just trying to – my job in Transnet was to meet 
customer expectations.  Customers want to move a product 
from point A to point B.  What we found was, the assets 
were too old, locomotives were more than 35 years old, 
they failed all the time, a trip to Durban which could 
ordinarily by train take 12 hours would take 35 hours.  You 
can’t run an economy when producers and consumers 
20 
cannot not, within reason – with reasonable expectation 
know what time their cargo will be there because people 
are chasing just in time principles, their production – there 
are factories that need certain raw materials to go into a 
process in order for them to run. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 164 of 416 
 
So, as a result, even though railways are cheaper 
than trucks or road, people ended up transporting a vast 
number of tonnages via the road because of the lack of the 
reliability of the rail.  What had triggered is, there was a 
serious under investment which had happened over a 
period of time in the railway, in fact the last locomotives 
that had been acquired were around 1972 which was a 
problem and that’s why you were now having a process and 
a system where you had locomotives that failed because 
they were too old.  They had gone through midlife refits 
10 
and some of the parts that were required were no longer 
there.  Some of these locomotives are no longer even in 
manufacture but Transnet was still running them. 
So, what ended up happening is that if you had 20 
locomotives running you would park 2 locomotives from 
which you would take some parts to use on the others 
because there’s nowhere else that you are going to find 
these parts, they are now obsolete.  So, that was the 
situation that we were in, but we were also saying that if 
we wanted to create a world class, competitive logistic 
20 
system for our country, reliability is at the top end of the 
system that you need to create and in order to be reliable 
you need locomotives that have fewer faults per 100 000 
ton kilometres as much as possible.  Ours was just simply 
out of the range that you could have your clients to have 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 165 of 416 
 
any form of confidence in the system that you had and as a 
result, therefore, the railway was just not reliable and we 
found that more and more trucks were on the road and that 
causes also, untold issues. 
So, we as the people who then, had to deal with the 
clients, we required to have these assets that would give a 
measure of respectability to the promise that we made to 
customers.  So, we, the lowly railway people were only 
really interested in acquiring these assets so that we could 
put them into operations and run them.  The group had to 
10 
fund and finance this, they have treasury operations and 
finance people who are hired to do this.  Then the other 
thing that we were then doing was to then be involved in 
the procurement process. The procurement process has got 
its own procedures manual in terms of how it works.  So 
you’re looking at the interplay of these three processes.  
The investing decision we could not make at our division 
because what we needed to buy was just simply too large for 
our delegated authority or anything so this was probably I 
think Transnet had a R300 billion market demand strategy I 
20 
cannot remember the actual number I think it went to about 
350 and these locomotives that we wanted to acquire were 
estimated at roughly about 40 billion of that which was about 
15 to 18% of the – the total of Transnet.   
So Transnet had to look at this very closely so the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 166 of 416 
 
investment decision therefore also had to take place at 
board level in fact it took place at ministerial level because 
of the – the size of it and there were PFMA issues.  So I 
think that is the context within which these key decisions had 
to be made.   
So Transnet Freight Rail worked on the investment 
case up to a certain point and the Transnet said okay thank 
you very much we think we like what you want to achieve 
however it is too big for you so we run with it on your behalf.  
We would like your input from time to time so give us some 
10 
support people that we can liaise with that will deal with 
these issues but we will also get external people to assist us 
because it is just simply too big.   
And so that is what they did.  So that was the 
investment decision until the time when it went to board from 
the board it went to the ministers and then it was approved.  
So that was the aspect that we dealt with at TFR.  So we 
came up with a business case up to a particular level when 
we presented it to what is called the Group Capital 
Investment Committee.   
20 
After the Group Capital Investment Committee then 
the Group CFO then had to take this and run with it and do 
all of the different things that had to be done like the capital 
assurance, the risk management framework etcetera around 
it leading to the board the decisions to hatch all of those 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 167 of 416 
 
things.   
 
But then the second decision that we were involved 
in as TFR was the pre-payment.  So our chief procurement 
officer then was given the authority via the board also just to 
go to the board first to say now you can initiate and you can 
start the process.  And then we had to go back to the board 
and say these are the committees that we will put in place in 
order for us to be able to deliver. 
 
Then TFR also ran with the procurement process.  
We then have high value tender teams which is an audit 
10 
function and a compliance function that looks at every step 
of the way as you deal with this and ticks an say okay you 
can go to the next step you have fulfilled satisfactory these 
particular steps. 
 
The third one which is the financing one which 
involved how you finance it that is way over our league at 
the – that is what the Group function and finance and 
treasury typically dealt with although they would ask us for 
input in terms of if we produce so many per year how much 
money would you need in that year to – in order to be able to 
20 
finance and pay?  
 
So I think that provides context Chair and then we 
can then go into the actual… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Specifics and the processes. 
MR GAMA:  The actual specific things but then I think once 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 168 of 416 
 
we have understood that – I think specifically when you do 
the investment decision you – you make all kinds of 
assumption from a clean slate or from certain things that you 
know.   
 
You might find that by the time you get to the end of 
the process that which you thought you know you find that 
you only know –knew 50 or 60% of it and then you have to 
deal with it so you end up with what is called an estimate of 
the investment in terms of what it is going to cost. 
 
And then once you do the procurement decision the 
10 
procurement decision is the one that gives you the actual 
cost that you are going to deal with and then the final step 
will then come in because I can give you an actual today to 
say if we bought all of them today it is going to cost us so 
much we knew that out of the – out of the procurement 
process.  But then you need the clever finance people to 
then say to you okay if it is going to be delivered over a 
seven year period and you have to borrow money what does 
that mean; what is it that we will have to do?   
Then they talk about the net present value or the 
20 
future value of the present cash flows and it gets – it gets 
complicate we never really got too involved in it.  They would 
tell us what it was and we would accept what they tell us 
because that is what they do every day – that is – that is 
their job. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 169 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So I just wanted to look then at 
the first phase as you call it – the business case or 
investment decision.  Could I just take you to certain parts of 
your affidavit please?  At page 250.133 and I am talking now 
of your third affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is at Bundle 7? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Bundle 7 Chairperson.  Are you there 
Mr Gama? 
MR GAMA:  Yes I am. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now just to thrash out what you have 
been saying about the business case.  At 9.3: 
“The 1064 locomotive business case was 
developed at TFR where after it was handed 
over to head office.” 
MR GAMA:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you go on to say: 
“In terms of the development of the business 
case for the 1064 locomotives will probably 
be between six and ten individuals that 
20 
contributed 
to 
the 
development 
of 
the 
business case.  The team was coordinated by 
Callard whose main role was to ensure that 
the business case was coherent and that it 
integrated 
various elements of 
business, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 170 of 416 
 
financial, commercial, technical as well as 
operational capabilities within TFR with a 
view to optimise in the fleet.” 
At 9.5. 
“The business case was finalised by TFR 
sometime in 2012 and then submitted the 
Group Finance division of Transnet SOC 
Limited which then appointed McKinsey as 
well as other transaction advisors that would 
assist Transnet in acquisition of the 1064 
10 
locomotives.” 
 
So I just wanted to confirm with you these transaction 
advisors they were not appointed at TFR level they were 
appointed at Transnet level after the business case was 
handed over to them, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then you say at 9.6: 
“Once the business case had been handed 
over from TFR division to head office the 
business case became the responsibility of 
20 
head office.” 
MR GAMA:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You say at 9.7: 
“Between May 2012 and April 2013 the 
business case was dealt with by the Group 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 171 of 416 
 
Chief Financial Officer at the time Anoj Singh 
and Mohammedy as the General Manager 
responsible 
for 
capital 
assurance 
and 
integration” 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you say at 9.8: 
“In the main Callard and Pillay together with 
others from the TFR division continued to 
support 
and 
assist 
McKinsey 
and 
the 
Transnet 
group 
in 
terms 
of 
providing 
10 
professional 
input 
concerning 
technical 
information that was required.” 
 
And then if I can take you to 10.1 you say the same 
thing: 
“The initial business case was prepared by 
TFR.” 
At 10.2: 
“The business case was submitted to Group 
Finance and from the time that it was 
presented as a business case at the Transnet 
20 
Capital Investment Committee Group Finance 
advised that they were appointing McKinsey 
to evaluate the business case.” 
And you make the point again at 11.2: 
“The appointment of transaction advisors 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 172 of 416 
 
took place at Group head office level.” 
Over the page you were not – 12.1: 
“Party to the appointment of either McKinsey 
nor Regiments.” 
MR GAMA:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then I just wanted you to confirm 
13.2: 
“I confirm that Singh performed the key 
oversight role and I in my capacity as CEO of 
TFR during the period May 2012 to April 
10 
2014 provided him with support in the form of 
Human 
Resources 
from 
within 
the 
TFR 
division.” 
MR GAMA:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And the relevance of those dates May 
2012 when the initial business case was presented and April 
2013 when the board confirmed it. 
MR GAMA:  Sorry where are you now? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The significance of the date May 2012 
to April 2013. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph 20.2. 
MR GAMA:  Yes the significance of that date is that in May 
2012 is when we basically took the investment case to the 
Transnet Capital Investment Committee and after May 2012 
when they the group office then accepted the business case 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 173 of 416 
 
they then said look we need to evaluate and assess this 
business case.  It took them then the better part of the next 
twelve months to do exactly that.  And then in April 2013 the 
board approved the business case. That is the significance 
of those dates. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then if I could take you Mr Gama 
because you – a lot of this is then repeated but gathered 
together are then quite usefully.  At page 250.169 – 169 
under the heading Acquisition of the 1064 diesel and electric 
locomotives. 
10 
MR GAMA:  169? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  169 yes.  Paragraph 78 you confirm 
that you were then the Chief Executive Officer during the 
acquisition phase.  You talk about a team from TRF having 
been responsible.   
At 78.3 over the page: 
“Once the investment case was adopted by 
Capital its future management was assumed 
by Mr Singh the GCFO of Transnet.  You 
submitted the investment case to the Group 
20 
Executive Committee.  Once approved by the 
Executive Committee it was considered by 
the GCEO who recommended it to BADC 
whose chairperson in turn recommended the 
investment case to the board.” 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 174 of 416 
 
I just want to go through those – those steps if I may? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So could you just perhaps expand 
upon those various different levels and the role of the Chief 
Executive, the role of BADC and then the role of the board in 
relation to the business case. 
MR GAMA:  So if – if we use 78.3 as a – as a pillar.  So the 
Capital Investment Committee is charged with looking at the 
investment case.  The people at Group Finance would then 
look at it they assess and evaluate under the leadership of 
10 
the Group Chief Financial Officer.  
Once they are satisfied with it they do many tests 
financial and risk framework tests.  Once they are satisfied 
with it then it moves upstairs to the Group Executive 
Committee for approval or recommendation. The Group 
Executive Committee is the highest decision making audi 
amongst the 
executives 
and is chaired 
by the 
Chief 
Executive Officer.  Once the Group Executive Committee has 
then dealt with it then the GCE has to engage the board 
committees.   
20 
So in this case it had to go to the board Acquisition 
And Disposals Committee.  And once the board Acquisition 
And 
Disposals 
Committee 
has 
approved 
or 
got 
it 
recommended to it then that chairperson of that committee or 
that sub-committee of the board would then recommend the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 175 of 416 
 
investment case to the board itself.   
And in this case after the board has approved it also 
needed to go to the – to the Minister because it exceeded 
the delegated framework within which the board could 
approve. I think the board could approve around R4 billion 
so anything above the R4 billion has to go to the Minister. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So I just wanted to ask you about this 
BADC as we call it the BADC.  That we know is a committee 
of the board, correct? 
MR GAMA:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And typically who would – who would 
sit on the BADC?  How many members would it have? 
MR GAMA:  Probably four or five non-executive board 
members would sit in there and then the GCFO and the GCE 
were ex-official members of that committee. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Of the BADC?  So that would have 
been up until they went – they were seconded to Eskom 
would it be Mr Molefe and Mr Singh? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how is the chairperson of the 
20 
BADC appointed do you know? 
MR GAMA:  I do not know probably by the chairperson of the 
board.  I am not sure.  I have seen in certain instances 
where I think there were two separate processes that get 
followed in this type of thing.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 176 of 416 
 
Amongst the non-executives they would sit and they 
will say we have five committees in the board we need a 
chairperson of each and then they would decide amongst 
themselves who was going to chair this one.  But I know that 
two 
committees 
which 
is 
the 
HR 
and 
Remuneration 
Committee even after they have agreed they have to send 
that to the Minister to approve.   
So that – that is the HR and RAMCO as well as the 
Audit and Risk Committee I think those ones the Minister 
then gives final approval of who will chair that.  So the 
10 
chairperson of the board will then provide the Minister to say 
these are the people who will be the members and this is the 
person who will be the chairman and then in terms of 
corporate governance we will also share a very brief CV of 
each of the members.  But most of the time the – because in 
Transnet the board members are all appointed by the 
Minister so the Minister would have had some of the CV’s of 
these people before they were appointed. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Gama just picking up from that 
we were at 78.3 and explained that to us and then what you 
20 
deal with is the evolution of the business case.  If I could 
take you to page 171 you will see about seven lines down on 
the right hand side: 
“On 25 April 2014 one year after we handed 
over the process to the Group the board 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 177 of 416 
 
approved the business case.” 
So it culminated in board approval is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then you go onto say at 78.6 and 
you have already addressed this: 
“Once the business case was approved the 
procurement process was initiated.” 
I just want to ask you a few questions about that.  From what 
we have heard the procurement process the initiation of it 
you have the issuing of RFP’s, you have that process in 
10 
closing and then you have various stages the tender 
evaluation stage, the BAFO stage, best and final offer and 
the PTN Post Tender Negotiation phase and that then 
ultimately results in the conclusion of what I will refer to as 
LSA’s Locomotive Supply Agreements.   Are they – is that a 
correct lineation of the various phases?  Tender evaluation, 
BAFO and PTN stage? 
MR GAMA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja.  Now who was – you say that Mr 
Jiyane TFR was involved in that procurement process. 
20 
MR GAMA:  Yes Mr Jiyane was the overseer of the 
procurement process.  Within the procurement process I 
think they were close to I might be wrong maybe 120 who 
dealt with the approving.  And each of these in – maybe 
there were six or seven different committees each of them 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 178 of 416 
 
had a chairperson.   
So there would be a chairperson for the commercial 
stream and so that educate they have got certain things that 
they are looking for.  There is a chairperson for the financial 
stream.  There would be a chairperson for the technical 
stream.  There would be a chairperson for the supplier 
development stream.  There were also BBBEE and equity 
sort of requirements that were required in that.   
So I do not know if I have done justice to the 
different committees but then those chairpersons constituted 
10 
what was called the tender evaluation team.  And each of 
those then reported to Jiyane.   
Alongside that was the high value tender evaluation 
team which is the independent team of experts and people 
that have got audit and compliance skills and they will look 
at the procedures manual.  They will look at the entire RFP 
to say what does it say and how do certain things happen.  
They will look at any deviation that needs to be made and 
they will make recommendations and they will say okay this 
deviation you can make but go back to whoever is the 
20 
delegated authority to give you the proper delegation to do it 
etcetera, etcetera.   
So in total I think roughly let me just say between 60 
and maybe 120 different people I have seen their names in 
one of the documents that shows the different committees. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 179 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well I do not know if the number is that 
important but I understood in your affidavit you talked about 
40 but we will come to that. 
MR GAMA:  Ja I am – I am not sure. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sure. 
MR GAMA:  That is why I am saying. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think they referred to as cross – 
cross-functional. 
MR GAMA:  Yes cross-functional team there is one for 
finance, commercial etcetera some were smaller some were 
10 
bigger. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MR GAMA:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr Gama perhaps just before we 
end off for the day let me just ask you this.  Was the – would 
there then be a time where short – there would be a short 
list of bidders and that – that preliminary choice or 
assessment would have to be approved again by the BADC 
and 
the 
board 
before 
one 
entered 
the 
post-tender 
negotiation? 
20 
MR GAMA:  It depends on the delegation that was made at 
the time that the investment decision is made.  So the board 
would give the GCE a delegation they will say we give you 
delegation to go out on tender which is the procurement 
process.  If they want the GCE to shortlist they would also 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 180 of 416 
 
say that.   
And then they will say after you have shortlisted 
come back to us for further delegation – share with us who 
you have shortlisted etcetera and we can then make a 
decision in terms of what the next steps ought to be.  So that 
is normally the process.   
Sometimes they will say GCE we give you the 
authority to go out on tender, shortlist, approve a supplier 
and come and share with us who the chosen supplier is 
based on your PPM. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now Mr Gama I understand that you 
would not have been involved yourself in the tender 
evaluation process but that you were involved in the post-
tender negotiations, is that correct? 
MR GAMA:  Yes I was chosen or nominated as it were to be 
part of the post-tender negotiations.  I had a very fancy title 
of them the co-chair of the negotiating committee and what it 
really meant was that if during the negotiations there was 
anything that the negotiating teams needed clarity on or if 
there were deadlocks with suppliers etcetera they could 
20 
come to me and explain the problem and I could then sit with 
them and say okay go about it this way, look at it in different 
ways.   
As it turned out I was never approached at any point 
by the teams to say we have deadlocked somewhere we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 181 of 416 
 
need your input or counsel or certain amount of wisdom.  It 
did not really happen there.   
I think at each stage they came back and said we are 
now at this stage this is what we are doing.  They – it was 
more – it became just more of an information sharing thing.  
I never found myself having to get stuck in any kind of 
negotiation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So who – who were the other members 
of the Locomotive Steering Committee? 
MR GAMA:  The Locomotive Steering Committee was 
10 
chaired by the GCE.  I was a member, the GCFO was a 
member.   I think legal and compliance was a member.  
Probably internal audit and I think Jiyani was an ex-official. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then what has also surfaced in 
evidence is a sub-committee of the Locomotive Steering 
Committee.  Do you recall such a body comprising yourself, 
Mr Molefe and Mr Singh? 
MR GAMA:  Ja I would not say it is a sub-committee but I 
think that was the committee and then some of the people 
who were ad-hoc members. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And so you deal with your role 
perhaps I could just take you so we can finish this off to 
page 250.165 paragraph 70.1.  You say: 
“I was indeed a member of the Locomotive 
Steering Committee it was Brian Molefe who 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 182 of 416 
 
designated me as co-chair of the negotiating 
committee.  I did not participate in any 
negotiations as alleged or at all whilst I did 
in fact offer to assist with any deadlock or 
dispute – disputes that arose during the 
negotiation process.  I was at no stage 
requested into nor to assist.” 
 
When you talk about – sorry would you confirm that? 
MR GAMA:  I confirm that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When you talk about the co-chair who 
10 
was the other – the other co-chair? 
MR GAMA:  It was Mr Singh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Singh.  And who then you say you – 
you did not become involved in the negotiations who actually 
ran and conducted them? 
MR GAMA:  In the main Mr Singh was actually based at the 
place where the negotiations took place but I think he would 
be the one who would indicate whether he was ever 
approached in terms of the negotiation process but Jiyane 
oversaw aspects of it.  At the negotiation there were various 
20 
teams.   
There was I know that there was a team that looked 
after the Transnet Engineering sub-contract.  There were 
financial teams but in the main it was a lot of the same 
people 
who 
were 
at 
the 
adjudication 
who 
were 
also 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 183 of 416 
 
negotiating. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson I see it is just after five if 
this is a convenient time to end the daytime session. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unfortunately some of us must go into the 
evening session.  Yes I think let us adjourn the day session 
at this stage.  I think that in terms of where we are with 
regard to Mr Gama’s evidence Friday we are where we last 
discussed in chambers.  I do not know whether in the 
meantime there is anything you wish to project to me that is 
either yourself or your (talking over one another) 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Only – the only thing that I can report 
back to you from my side is Mr Oldwadge will tell you of his 
position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that apparently Mr ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Molefe. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Molefe is flexible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  As you know he is scheduled for 
Thursday night. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He has indicated potentially – we 
haven’t taken it any further with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay.  We leave it on the 
basis that on your side sometime on Thursday or the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 184 of 416 
 
evening session or sometime on Thursday we can make 
time for Mr Gama to continue his evidence even if it is for 
the number of hours that his counsel would not be 
available on ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on Friday morning and then continue 
at a certain time on Friday subject to what they have to 
say. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, I think he wants to 
address you on that.  As I understand that their position 
10 
remains. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is either Thursday and no Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Or it is Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then, of course, with the difficulty of 
Mr 
Oldwadge 
not 
being 
here 
but 
can 
I 
let 
you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...can he address you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Before – he might be 
able to address us but I wanted to hear your side. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you had made that offer. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 185 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are able to make that to may be to 
be a position that from the Legal Team’s side and the 
Commission’s side ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...once the President’s evidence on 
Thursday is done, we could continue with Mr Gama’s 
evidence, whether we have restricted it to a particular 
number of hours to make sure that we do not lose time that 
would have been used on Friday morning.  From your side, 
10 
that is available.  Then he can indicate what his position 
is. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Counsel for Mr Gama, are 
you able to say anything about the position? 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Mr Chair, I do not want to burden the 
record with the repetition of what it is that I communicated 
to you in chambers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   Regrettable, my position is that I must 
20 
commit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
OLDWAGE: 
 
 
...from 
a 
timing 
perspective 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 186 of 416 
 
ADV OLDWAGE:   ...to another firm of attorneys by virtue 
of a matter I have in court on Friday.  I did communicate to 
Mr Myburgh ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV OLDWAGE:   ...that I need to know well in advance.  
So if it is not a situation, I must know by, perhaps, 
tomorrow afternoon.  I have to commit my time elsewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  I think as far as 
I am concerned.  One, Friday proceeds as planned, starting 
usual starting time.  However, we could start later than the 
10 
usual time to accommodate counsel for Mr Gama if on 
Thursday they are available for us to make sure whatever 
time we would lose on Friday is used on Thursday but if, 
obviously, they are not available to take advantage of 
Thursday, then the position would remain – Friday remains 
as was prior to today.  Okay alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will then adjourn for about 10, 15-
minutes.  Will ten minutes do Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I think it should, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ten minutes, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   We just need to establish a remote 
link to Mr Solomon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Maybe we will say 15-
minutes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 187 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to be on the safe side.  We will 
adjourn for 15-minutes and then we will then start with the 
evening session.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, good evening to those 
who may not have been us during the day session.  
Mr Myburgh, are you ready? 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
we 
are. 
 
Thank 
you, 
10 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, as you know, this is an 
application brought by Mr Gigaba.  You should have the file 
in 
front 
of 
you. 
 
It 
is 
– 
it 
bears 
the 
reference 
SEQ18/20/2021 and in essence it is an application for a 
determination that Ms Gigaba’s affidavit be find to be 
inadmissible.  In the alternative that Mr Gigaba’s statement 
of response to be admitted and that both his evidence and 
that of Ms Gigaba be heard in camera and not disclosed to 
20 
the public other than to the extent to which you referred to 
it in your final report and that Mr Gigaba is granted leave 
to cross-examine Ms Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gigaba is represented by 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 188 of 416 
 
Mr Solomons who is remotely linked but you will see that 
he is there.  Oh, here he comes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And with your direction and leave, 
Chairperson  I assume you would want Mr Solomon to 
address you on the application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that he would then respond. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us do that.  Well, before we do that.  
Ms Magma’s legal representatives, if they wish to place 
themselves on record in regard to this application or they 
want to do so only in regard to the leading of evidence? 
ADV S LEBAGENG:   Thank you very much, Chair.  We do 
place ourselves on record.  My name is Simbati(?) 
Lebageng(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV S LEBAGENG:   I am from ...[indistinct].  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 
ADV S LEBAGENG:   I am with my attorney, Ms Quali(?) 
and indeed Ms Gigaba is here with us.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV S LEBAGENG:   And insofar as the application is 
concerned by Ms Gigaba.  I am informed - I have a letter 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 189 of 416 
 
that was sent prior to the Commission and to their Legal 
Team indicating that Ms Gigaba will not oppose and will 
simply abide by the decision of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright. 
ADV S LEBAGENG:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright.  Good afternoon, good evening, 
Mr Solomons. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Good evening, Chair.  I appear in this 
matter together with my learned friend, Mr Gumby(?) 
[00:03:23] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   For the applicant in the application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Chair, we will also refer just shortly 
before the commencement of these proceedings with a 
letter which was apparently addressed to the Commission 
from Ms Gigaba’s legal representative. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   We were also aware that on the last 
occasion when our application was due to be heard and 
20 
Ms Gigaba was due to lead evidence, that another letter 
was read out by her attorney on her behalf, setting out that 
she did not wish to participate further in the proceedings.   
 
So certain of the allegations that are contained 
in our application and certain of the submissions have, to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 190 of 416 
 
some extent, been superseded and we would submit Chair, 
bolstered by the attitude of Ms Gigaba as set out in the two 
letters that have been presented to you.  We have done 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, just hang on one second.   
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...further ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Solomons. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am aware that there is a certain letter, 
a long letter that was shown to me this afternoon 
10 
Ms Magma’s attorneys.  It is too long for me to read or it 
was too long for me to read within that tea break.  So I did 
see certain part of it, very little.  I have not read it.  I do 
not know – I did not get the impression that it is essential 
to read it before the hearing.  At any rate, it came late.   
 
So I do not take it as part of this application, nor 
do I take that other letter that was read out on that day as 
part of this application.  I believe that what I have got here 
is simply the papers as they stood n that day.  Whether or 
not anything has been filed since then, I am not aware and 
20 
certainly I have not been told.  So I am very keen 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am very keen that we use the time we 
have to deal with the application because if the position is 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 191 of 416 
 
that we will or that we end up having to hear her evidence, 
we need all the time that we can have.  So I just mention 
that so as you address me you know what it is that I have 
read and what it is that I have not read. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  DCJ, may I ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Mr Solomons.  I think Mr Myburgh 
want say something. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, sorry.  I am terrible sorry to 
interrupt but I have been asked that Mr Solomons please 
10 
clean his camera if possible because the technical people 
say the picture is very fudged. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Did you hear that Mr 
Solomons? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   I heard.  I will try and ask for someone 
assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  But ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   Can I address you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   We – I can see you.  Yes, continue. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Thank you.  Chair, what you have just 
20 
placed on record creates some difficulty for me and my 
client. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   In this sense. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 192 of 416 
 
ADV SOLOMONS:   We do believe that the letter that we 
just received now is important.  It was just, literally, sent to 
us a few moments ago.  We do believe it is important 
because it not only bolsters my client’s application but it, 
in a sense, the supports the needs for the relief that we 
seek.   
 
And if I preclude it from referring to it, it will 
certainly hamper my client in presenting his application in 
the most favourable manner and we would hope in the most 
informative manner for the benefit of the Commission.  But 
10 
I do not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I want to say to you is.  I just 
wanted you to know what the factual position is, namely 
that I have not read the whole of that letter and what I 
have read is very little.  That is as far as I wanted to go, 
you know? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether or not you can rely on it and if 
you want to rely on it, what needs to be done, I have not 
gone into that.  I just wanted you to know that as a matter 
20 
of fact I have not read it because it came – I have not had 
time.  I have been sitting the whole day hearing evidence.  
Ja. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   I understand it.  I am appreciative of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 193 of 416 
 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Of that difficulty.  But Chair, then there 
are different ways to deal with it.  If you are happy for me 
to address you on aspects of the letter in the absence of 
you having not considered it in its entirety, I would be 
happy to do so.  If you require my client to place the letter 
more formally before you by way of an affidavit then that 
may mean that this application cannot be heard now.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...falls flat.  If facts are placed before 
the Commission, not by my client, then we would be – and 
10 
when I say before the Commission and placed on record 
before the Commission, then my client, with respect, 
should be able to rely upon those facts insofar as he 
deems any of those facts of what has been placed on 
record to be supportive of his application and hopefully 
also to bring those particular facts placed on record to the 
attention of the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...to allow the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second.  Mr Myburgh ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Solomons.  Mr Myburgh, 
do you have any position about the use of those letters 
that are not here? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, I think – well, certainly 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 194 of 416 
 
from the Legal Team’s point of view.  If this is a – if this is 
going to give rise to a delay because Mr Solomons wants 
to put in an affidavit, we would rather the matter be dealt 
with now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is not clear to me how this letter 
ultimately will assist Mr Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But obviously, Mr Solomons wants to 
make his ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I think, Mr Solomons, if you say – if 
you submit to me that I can and should rely on it as it is 
and I do not know if maybe you rely on both or both letters, 
the one that was read out here last time and the one that 
arrived today.  If you submit that I can and should have 
regard to it, I am quite happy to let you make that 
submission and you refer me to whatever portions of it that 
you think are relevant or important and we continue without 
me making any ruling.  And then once I have heard 
everything, I can take it from there.  Is that fine with you? 
20 
ADV SOLOMONS:   That is quite fine, Chair.  What I would 
perhaps 
recommend, 
subject 
to 
you, 
Chair, 
is 
that 
Ms Gigaba’s legal representative perhaps read into the 
record and place as she did on the last occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but I do not want somebody to read 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 195 of 416 
 
the whole letter because it is quite long.  So I – if you have 
certain parts that you want to rely on, I am quite happy to 
allow you to read those parts.  That is number one.  
Number two.  I was must choose to place some time limit 
on the time for the application.   
 
So maybe let us do that first, so that as you 
make your submissions you have an understanding of how 
much time we – you have.  Because of the fact that you are 
such an experienced counsel, I think I should not give you 
more than 15-minutes.  What do you think?  [laughs]  This 
10 
is nothing.  This is nothing.   
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You can... [laughs] 
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You can handle this easily.  [laughs]  So 
if I give you 15-minutes from now, is that fine? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   I would be guided by your Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us try that. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Have you – I imagine you would have 
had the opportunity.  Have you had the opportunity of 
20 
seeing our submissions which was sent today sometime to 
the Commission? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I have not seen them.  I read the 
papers last time when the matter was going to be heard.  I 
have not seen any new papers today.  They might be here 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 196 of 416 
 
but I am not aware of them.  I have not been told of 
anything 
that 
may 
have 
been 
filed 
today. 
 
But 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Well, Chair I will try and stay within 
the 15-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes-no, that is fine. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is fine. 
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Can I just at the outside then, tick(?) 
where we - without necessarily reading of the sake of time 
saving. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Perhaps to start with Ms Gigaba’s 
letter.  We want to just make the following points where we 
think what she has set out in the letter supports our 
contentions.  The one is, she appears to take the point that 
she is not a compatible witness although she does not 
want to be a contentions witness.   
20 
 
So she respects the subpoena received by her 
but it would seem to us she wishes to exercise a martial 
privilege which is part of what we have argued in our 
application 
and 
in 
our 
initial 
submissions 
and 
supplementary submissions.  So that is the first point.  And 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 197 of 416 
 
Chair, if you want to make a note of that.  That is 
paragraph 4 of the letter. 
 
The second point that we wish to make which we 
submit is the supportive of our contentions is.  She says in 
paragraphs 8.3 and 8.4 of her letter...  Chair, if you would 
also just bear in mind.  I only had a very quick glance at 
the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   But she says – thank you, Chairperson.  
She says that there are certain facts that are not within her 
10 
personal knowledge.  She also place it on record that what 
is in her statement or affidavit is not in all respects, it 
would appear to be, accurate.  That is the third thing. 
 
The fourth thing.  In paragraph 8.5 she raises 
security concerns which we say supports the alternative 
relief that we seek if she is to give evidence that it should 
be in camera.  We have raised that in our application as an 
alternative. 
 
And then refrain from, a concern, she has got a 
concern relating to public disclosure which again feeds into 
20 
our submission in regard to the alternative relief.  Chair, I 
am going to just try and share our amended submission 
with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   [No audible reply]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 198 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may do so. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   I am trying now.  I just hope it will... Is 
the document on your screen, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
it 
is 
but 
let 
me 
find 
out.  
Mr Myburgh, do you know whether I have go a hard copy 
here in the file? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, Chairperson.  I do not think you 
do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think your junior also shakes her 
head.  So. 
10 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
We 
ourselves 
have 
not 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   received the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   ...the amended written submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I do not think it is a difficulty if 
Mr Solomons ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I will not be able to read the text, 
20 
Mr Solomons.  So it will be better if you deal – you 
articulate those parts of the revised written submissions 
that you believe are important. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes.  Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I will not be able to read from where I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 199 of 416 
 
am. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   That is not a problem.  But perhaps we 
could – it was sent to the Commission and perhaps for the 
purposes 
of 
your 
ruling 
that 
our 
learned 
friend 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Maybe ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...whilst I proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe what I can tell you Mr Solomons 
is that it might be convenient because of time constraints 
that you deal with your client’s application only insofar, 
today, only insofar as it relates to your relief other than 
leave to cross-examine because even if were to grant you 
leave to cross-examine, you would not cross-examine 
today  So another day can be arranged. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Ja, we ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So maybe ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe you – maybe the relief to cross-
examine can be dealt with some other time.  What is more 
urgent is such a relief as need to be dealt with today if 
Ms Mngoma is to testify.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 200 of 416 
 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes.  Yes, Chair.  Well, that involves 
two aspects.  One is our application that she should not 
testify in relation to the contents of her affidavit that had 
been shared with us.  And then, in the alternative, if she is, 
it should be held in camera.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...and we make our submissions in our 
application why that should be.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us take the first one.  What is 
the basis for the first one? 
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it difficult ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   ...the basis for this is – there are a 
number but I will just try to deal with them in turn. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   The main thrust is that these are 
parties who are married, who are going through an 
acrimonious divorce and a large portion and perhaps the 
majority 
of 
her 
evidence 
contained 
in 
the 
affidavit 
constitutes communications that took place between a 
20 
husband and wife which would ordinarily be protected by 
the marital privilege.  So that is the first point. 
 
We say that communications that took place 
between Mr and Mrs Gigaba within the marital privilege 
context should not be aired in public.  Secondly, we say 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 201 of 416 
 
that because of the acrimonious nature of their divorce 
proceedings, there is an inherent risk in the evidence and 
the veracity of the evidence that she is going to give and 
that will impact upon questions of credibility, et cetera. 
 
And that fear has been exacerbated by the two 
letters that she has addressed to the Commission and it 
seems to us that the Commission should not be used as a 
platform for evidence of this nature where the parties are 
in engaged in an acrimonious divorce to bring about the 
end of their matrimonial regime.   
10 
 
And we submit that it sets a dangerous and 
perhaps distasteful president that the Commission’s work 
which we all endorse as extremely important for our 
democracy but it should not be used as a forum for the 
area of domestic grievances but that is not the reason why 
we say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, Mr Solomons.  
Maybe because I am listening to what you have to say 
more than reading, I am not reading what is on the screen.  
Maybe you should just let us see your face and not the 
20 
written submissions.  I will make notes of the important 
points. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes, it is just...  Can you not see me, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I can see a little bit but I am 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 202 of 416 
 
focussing more on your – on what you have to say to me 
than the written – I prefer to see you. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   I will stop the sharing then and – is 
that better then? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  I prefer to see you as you 
make your submissions.   
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And will simply ask that you look at your 
written 
submissions 
and 
see 
what 
you 
need 
to 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Certainly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Certainly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   So Chair, the other concern that we 
raised is the question of the minor children born from the 
marriage.  There are numerous references which we have 
highlighted in our application where they are implicated in 
the evidence and we need not overemphasise that the 
rights of those minor children would need to be protected. 
20 
 
And to have this type of evidence presented in 
so a public a forum which concerns the relationship 
between the parents who are going through this divorce, 
we submit it is another factor to be taken into account.  So 
Chair, why we say ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 203 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you have relied on two points in 
relation to the first relief.  The marital privilege and the 
acrimonious nature of the divorce proceedings.  Is that 
right? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Marital privilege.  You are saying I 
must refuse to hear evidence as a Commission that may 
relate to allegations of state capture and corruption from a 
person who is willing to give that evidence and knowing 
that I am not a criminal court? 
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Chair, if – certainly we accept you are 
not a criminal court.  The question of being willing to give 
evidence, we have a concern with.  We do emphasise that 
recent events have superseded our initial application and 
we would invite you Chair not to ignore what has been 
submitted 
to 
the 
Commission 
through 
Ms 
Gigaba’s 
attorney’s letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, have you got ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   To say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Have you got an accurate 
20 
statement of the law on the privilege that you refer to? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   We have.  We have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   In our heads ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What...  Ja, what does it say?  Just read 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 204 of 416 
 
it. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Well, what we say is.  Spousal 
testimonial privilege – we are talking now in a criminal 
context – does not exist.  We have to protect the rights of 
the accused.  It exists for public policy reasons and to 
protect the right of privacy.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no what I want is this ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What I want is the statement of the 
privilege, the principal.   
10 
ADV SOLOMONS:   We ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Where you have an accurate statement 
of what the privilege is.  This what may not be done.  This 
is what may be done.   
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes, Chair.  We ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not that – is it available?  Can it be 
invoked in a Commission – a Commission proceedings? 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Well, of course we recognise that we 
made the point in our amended submissions that the 
Commission stands in a slightly different position but what 
20 
we are inviting you Chair to hold, that the underline public 
policy reasons would apply to a commission because 
spousal – and we referred to a case of the – sorry – we 
referred to the authors in ...[indistinct], S J van Niekerk 
and S C Van der Merwe.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 205 of 416 
 
 
We have got the reference.  It is at 14.1 of our 
amended submissions.  If you can just make a note, Chair?  
Paragraph 14.1 that: 
“Spousal 
testimonial 
privilege 
reflects 
the 
public interest in preserving the institution of 
marriage and in recognition of the law of 
marriage in society and in the value preserving 
family, spousal testimonial privilege underlines 
the notion that spouses should be able to 
confide in one another freely and without 
10 
interference from the law...” 
CHAIRPERSON:   But once – I am sorry, Mr Solomons.  I 
know I am interrupting you but ...[intervenes]  
ADV SOLOMONS:   Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I want to make sure by the time the 15-
minutes is finished, you have dealt with things – matters 
that I think are important to assist me. 
ADV SOLOMONS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Once it is accepted that the privilege is 
not, let us say, applicable in commission proceedings.  
20 
What you would be asking me is.  You would be saying, 
and you must just confirm if that is what you are saying.  
We know it is not applicable, strictly speaking, to the 
commission proceedings but we think that it is something 
that the Commission can take into account, whatever else 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 206 of 416 
 
in deciding whether to grant the relief that we are asking 
for.  Is that what you are saying?   
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Quite so Chair, what we are saying is 
that there is spells or testimonial privilege and in that 
context the non-compellability argument that we have 
raised should apply and we say that really distinguishes 
itself from the judgment in the constitutional court in State 
versus Zuma regarding compellability of witnesses.  
 
So what we are saying Chair is that where you have 
Ms Gigaba who now appears to be a reluctant witness, is 
10 
no longer a voluntary participant in the commission’s 
proceedings, we say that in terms of Section 34 of the Act 
she should not and cannot be compelled to testify against 
Mr Gigaba, because all the protections that one would 
normally have, are no longer there.  
 
Because her evidence on her own version is now 
inherently unreliable and in this context one should not 
allow the airing of spousal grievances against one another 
in the public forum of the commission.  So we are asking 
you Chair to exercise a discretion in terms of Rule 1(1) so 
20 
that 
her 
evidence 
is 
ruled 
inadmissible 
and 
her 
compellability which she now relies upon and which we 
have also relied upon is such that she should not be 
compelled 
to 
give 
that 
evidence 
today 
before 
the 
commissioner.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 207 of 416 
 
 
Really 
we 
also 
rely 
Chair 
on 
the 
procedural 
prejudice which we say outweighs the minimal probative 
value if any, of Ms Gigaba’s evidence which it offers.  So 
when you look at the totality, when you look at the position 
that Ms Gigaba has now adopted, the procedural privilege, 
the prejudice is such that you should exercise that 
discretion and find that that compellability issue would 
apply to the work of the commission. 
 
Where you have got in the context of the spouses 
relationship a high likelihood that the evidence would be 
10 
unreliable, 
fabricated, 
highly 
subjected, 
emotive 
and 
possibly vindictively motivated.  Chair, the other problem 
we have and I know you have said we should separate the 
question of cross-examination and I am not going to go 
there, because in the interest of time and we agree with 
what is behind the Chair ’s ruling in that regard, but we do 
say that were she to give evidence, we would be compelled 
to have, to request you Chair to have an opportunity to 
tease out the collateral issues which give rise to portions 
of the evidence contained in her statement, which we again 
20 
submit 
respectfully 
to 
you 
Chair 
is 
outside 
of 
the 
commission’s mandate, and should not be allowed to be 
aired in this forum.  
 
We have made the point and we just want to 
emphasise that the admission of evidence of this nature, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 208 of 416 
 
we submit makes [indistinct] on Mr Gigaba and his 
children’s rights to dignity and privacy and we would 
submit Chair, that you have the right in terms of Regulation 
15 to determine your own procedures.  
 
Rule 6 allows you to receive evidence that you 
consider relevant and that you need not follow the strict 
rules of evidence regarding admissibility and we would 
submit that exercising that broad discretion that you have, 
this evidence should not be accepted.  
 
Chair, we make the point that whilst Rule 6 says 
10 
that the ordinary rules of the admissibility of evidence in 
courts of law need not be strictly applied to determine 
admissibility, we submit that the time tested norms of 
admissibility in court proceedings would find relevance to 
the commission’s determinations, and this is because those 
norms with respect have been developed to take into 
account issues such as reliability, probative value, fairness 
in assessing evidence, all of which are concerns which 
ought 
similarly 
to 
be 
valued 
in 
the 
commission’s 
assessment.  
20 
 
Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I do not know whether you have 
gone beyond the first relief, because I am looking at your 
time, whether you have started addressing the second 
relief or the alternative relief as well.  So I am just alerting 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 209 of 416 
 
you to time.  
 
I think you may well have exhausted 15 minutes, 
but maybe you have exhausted ten.  So I just want you to 
be alive to that.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Yes.  Certainly Chair.  We just, you 
asked me about where the privilege arises in terms of the 
Criminal Procedure Act.  I am not going to read it, Section 
198 and 199.  They are to be found at, if you could make a 
note 
paragraph 
29.10 
at 
page 
15 
of 
our 
amended 
submissions, and I am just going to make this last 
10 
submission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  And then move on to the second leg, 
but what we submit is that Section 198 of the Criminal 
Procedure Act, means that a witness in Ms Gigaba’s 
position may refuse to disclose marital communications 
with her husband, and she could also refuse to disclose 
communications which she has made.  
 
So we would say that she would be entitled to 
evoke that privilege.  We say she should not be compelled 
20 
to give evidence, and our amended submissions set out 
very clearly why we say this and we would urge you Chair, 
before you make any ruling, would have regard to that.  
 
Then just moving to the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  In your written submissions, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 210 of 416 
 
whatever you think is important, I would like you to 
articulate it, because I might not have time to go and read 
but if you have articulated what you believe is important, 
that is fine.  In regard to this stress relief.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  I think we have Chair, in respect of 
the first ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Relief. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  The first relief.  It is just there is no 
time to refer you to all the authorities we rely upon, but 
they are in our ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the written submissions.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Written submissions.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  In regard to the in camera element.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  We submit to you Chair, that if you 
do decide to have her evidence led and if she is to give 
evidence, the proceedings should be held in camera.  The 
reason we say you have that discretion in terms of Section 
4 of the Act and Regulation 2 also as read with Regulation 
20 
9, gives you that, those powers.  
 
4.2 specifically says you can make an order to be 
held in camera, as she has now elaborated upon in the 
latest 
letter 
that 
was 
placed 
on 
record 
before 
the 
commencement this afternoon, and as elaborated upon by 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 211 of 416 
 
Ms Gigaba in his statement, the evidence is acutely 
intimate and personal, and it relates not only to the 
spouses romantic and marital relationships, but also to 
their children’s private lives.  
 
Many of these impact upon the divorce proceedings 
which are presently sub judice and pending.  We have 
dealt 
with 
in 
quite 
some 
detail 
in 
our 
submissions 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on Mr Solomon.  I was still just 
looking at the power in Section 4.  
10 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  To you know, in camera proceedings 
strictly speaking are proceedings where the Court or the 
tribunal would exclude the public in effect from the 
hearing.  I know that in this commission the term in camera 
has been used sometimes or what we have done namely to 
allow witnesses who fear for their safety, who do not want 
their identities to be disclosed or their faces to be shown, 
to give evidence from a venue that is different from the 
venue of the hearing and they are, their evidence is heard 
20 
by the public and they can be cross-examined.  
 
But their identities are not published and their faces 
are not shown.  Sometimes members of the legal team 
have referred to that as in camera but strictly speaking it is 
not in camera, but that is what it is.  Here, Section 4 says: 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 212 of 416 
 
“All evidence and addresses should be heard 
in public, provided that the Chairman of the 
commission may in his discretion exclude from 
the place where such evidence is to be given 
or such address is to be deliver any class of 
persons or all persons whose presence at the 
hearing of such evidence or address is in his 
opinion not necessary or desirable.” 
 
Now of course the reality is that for the past two 
and a half years or whatever, the commission has been 
10 
operating on the basis that its proceedings are broadcast 
live and so on.  They are shown on TV and so on.  You, I 
do not remember that the papers say anything other than in 
camera about what we should do with those arrangements, 
existing arrangements if we grant your relief, bearing in 
mind what Section 4 says, namely the exclusion of the 
public from the venue.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Yes, well Chair, we have said and we 
agree with you that concealing the person’s face in these, 
in this situation, is not what would meet the potential harm 
20 
that we have described in our application and in our 
amended submissions.  
 
What we are saying is that where you have 
evidence of an acutely intimate and personal nature that 
relates not only to the spouses romantic and marital 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 213 of 416 
 
relationship but also to the children’s private lives.  It is 
inappropriate to have that evidence in a public forum and 
perhaps the answer to our alternate relief that we seek, is 
that reinforces the need for that evidence not to be led, 
because if the later of these proceedings are such that 
arrangements cannot be made to afford that protection, 
that really reinforces the need to exclude this evidence in 
all the circumstances that we have described between a 
spouse and a husband who may or may not be implicated 
in some wrongdoing.  
10 
 
So it really just reinforces the need to exclude her 
evidence, because if you cannot and it is no criticism of 
the commission, but if one cannot provide that type of 
anonymity and confidentiality and protection because of 
the nature of the proceedings, then we submit that really 
reinforces 
the 
point 
why 
Ms 
Gigaba 
should 
not 
be 
compelled to give evidence against her husband in the 
manner suggested.  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
My 
recollection 
Mr 
Solomon, 
my 
recollection of evidence relating to children seems to be 
20 
simply evidence about some present being given to a child 
or something like that.  I do not remember that there is 
evidence that relates to children that is ...[intervenes] 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  We have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Really of any serious negative nature.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 214 of 416 
 
ADV 
SOLOMON 
SC: 
 
We 
have 
highlighted 
in 
our 
submissions, our amended submissions Chair, the evidence 
that impacts upon the children, and just by way of 
example.  She commences her evidence with dealing with 
the nature of the romantic relationship with Mr Gigaba 
when she was pregnant with her first child.  
 
She describes those issues, she describes the 
couple’s 
financial 
arrangements 
at 
that 
time. 
 
She 
describes being unhappy with Mr Gigaba’s parenting.  
Claims that he did not spend enough time with his children.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SOLOMON SC:  A lot of these, I would not necessarily 
want to go through the list ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Because it is in a sense self-
defeating. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV 
SOLOMON 
SC: 
 
Because 
we 
are 
saying 
that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no. 
20 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Evidence should not, sorry Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Is it fine if I give you, I 
see we are at nearly quarter past.  I think you started 
maybe about quarter to or twenty to, I am not sure.  Is it 
fine if I give you five minutes to deal with whatever 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 215 of 416 
 
remains? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  That is fine Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  We are grateful for the indulgence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  What we would just submit on the 
question of the children, that the references to the children 
are not simply passing references.  Ms Gigaba’s claims 
intertwine the children’s lives, their health, their positions, 
their relationship with their parents, into the allegations 
10 
against Mr Gigaba. 
 
So there is really a cross-pollicisation which would 
be very difficult to untangle and those references are just 
contextualised amongst other details about immediate 
family and extended family’s homes and relationships.  So 
the silver thread that underpins the entire affidavit of Ms 
Gigaba runs deeply into the family relationship, the 
extended family relationship, the children.  
 
That evidence of course cannot be heard least of all 
tested Chair, without intimate aspects of the children’s 
20 
lives being disclosed.  So in doing so, regardless of the 
outcome of the findings, the Gigaba children who are now 
only eight and nine years old, will invariably be tainted 
with 
links 
of 
allegations 
of 
State 
Capture 
and 
the 
acrimonious divorce proceedings between their parents 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 216 of 416 
 
being aired in so public a forum.  
 
We say that such disclosure does not serve the 
public confidence in a manner that is proportionate to the 
harm occasioned to the children’s best interests.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  And we furthermore oppose the 
compellability of Ms Gigaba for the reasons we have 
stated, but our concerns have been certainly exacerbated 
by the recent events and what she has placed on record 
before you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  And really the legal teams who 
oppose our applications, suggesting that the evidence will 
be protected from public disclosure on the basis of the 
identity of witnesses, does not assist us really to meet 
these requirements.  
 
So we would submit Chair, that this is a case for the 
extension of the compellability argument, that given the 
unique facts that you are now presented with, particularly 
Ms Gigaba’s changed attitude, she is no longer a witness 
20 
who has simply come to the commission, and we just 
wanted to make this point which really concerns us and 
this is our final point.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Is that we understood she had 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 217 of 416 
 
approached the commission, but it seems from the letter 
that we received this afternoon, that the commission 
approached her and when you look at the way her 
statement reads with the headings and the flow of the 
statement, it engenders quite a lot of concern on the part 
of my client as to how the entire narrative was structured 
and whether that was indeed the [indistinct] of Ms Gigaba 
in the sense of she says now placing on record that there 
are aspects of the statement that she is unhappy about.  
 
What we say sets a dangerous president is that if 
10 
the commission is prepared to go and seek out witnesses 
who are involved in divorce proceedings which are pending 
between spouses to give evidence against a notionally 
implicated spouse, it really would set a very dangerous 
president.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No Mr Solomon. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  We will submit Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no Mr Solomon.  If the commission is 
set up to investigate allegations of State Capture and 
corruption, it cannot stop to look for people who can assist 
20 
us, just because they happen to be married or happen to 
be going through some divorce proceedings.  
 
It looks for people who can assist us to determine 
the issues before it.  It is doing the right thing.  If it 
becomes aware that somebody may have information that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 218 of 416 
 
will help it with the issues that it is required to deal with, it 
would be doing the right thing to make the approach, 
because it seeks to carry out its mandate.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  No Chair, we accept that but in 
circumstances where the witness now says that there are 
aspects 
of 
that 
affidavit 
she 
does 
not 
agree 
with 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that will be a separate matter.  That 
would be a separate matter.  
ADV SOLOMON SC:  That is what we are saying.  Not as a 
10 
general proposition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV 
SOLOMON 
SC: 
 
But 
just 
in 
these 
particular 
circumstances Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Those are our submissions Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no thank you.  Mr Myburgh, do you 
want to say something? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you Chairperson.  We 
have prepared some brief written submissions, if I could 
20 
hand them up to you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  They have been provided previously 
to Mr Solomon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 219 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson, I take it that we also 
have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  15 minutes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ten, 15 minutes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Well, Mr Solomon ended up 
having much more than ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We will not take more than 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay, alright. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
Chairperson, 
in 
these 
legal 
submissions we set out in our introduction the relief that is 
10 
sought and then in the second section we deal with the 
applicable regulatory framework which I am not going to 
waste time on.  I want to take you directly please to 
Section 3.  
 
That is at page 4, dealing with the admissibility of 
the witness’s affidavit.  Now as a general statement 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  Mr Solomon, can you 
hear or, I see I do not see your face, but can you hear Mr 
Myburgh?   
20 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  I can indeed Chair, I thought just to 
[indistinct] and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  I just wanted to make 
sure that you are able to hear so that if you, when you are 
required to respond, you will have heard him. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 220 of 416 
 
ADV SOLOMON SC:  Thank you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So at paragraph 17 we make the 
point Chairperson, that in general terms the witness’s 
evidence deals directly with matters that fall within the 
commission’s terms of reference, and also that the affidavit 
and the evidence falls within the mandate and area 
investigation of the commission. 
 
Then we set out in paragraph 19 and I am not going 
to deal with this on the record.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What the witness’s evidence includes 
and you would have seen that, and a lot of it is 
corroboratory.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 20 we also mention that 
she presents important original evidence and then at 21 
Chairperson, we pose the question then on what basis can 
this affidavit be found to be inadmissible, and when you 
look at Mr Gigaba’s affidavit as a whole, he deals with 
20 
three main points.  
 
Firstly that the affidavit it is alleged seeks to 
publicise private matters.  Secondly, that the admission of 
evidence is prejudicial to him and thirdly that the nature of 
the witness’s evidence, is largely irrelevant and of little 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 221 of 416 
 
probative value.  
 
We say the first contention is founded on the 
allegation that the witness’s approach to the commission is 
and I quote “an improper effort to advance her gender in 
our divorce proceedings.”  Well Chairperson, that is a 
matter for evidence, as motive often is.  
 
Then 
as 
for 
the 
balance 
of 
the 
applicant’s 
complaints 
under 
this 
head, 
about 
personal 
and 
matrimonial 
communications 
and 
as 
he 
puts 
it 
most 
disturbingly references to our children, they will without 
10 
merits and I would invite you Chairperson, to have regard 
to paragraph 16 of the papers and perhaps I could just 
take you there.  
 
This is at page 9, paragraph 16.  Thirdly and most 
disturbingly, Nomshula makes several references to our 
children and this is a point Chairperson that you put to Mr 
Solomon.  When you look at these five sub paragraphs, I 
mean they are completely innocuous.   
 
They are contextual and I am not going to go into 
the detail for obvious reasons.  We go back to our 
20 
submissions at paragraph 24, the second contention is 
premises on the hypothesis that the witness may assert 
marital communication privilege under cross-examination 
and thus avoid answering questions which would otherwise 
implicate her improper motive, and this will somehow cause 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 222 of 416 
 
procedural prejudice.  
 
Well, of course that is an hypothesis.  We do not 
know whether Ms Gigaba is going to do that.  But what is 
clear is that marital privilege does not apply in these 
proceedings and what we also know is that that privilege 
for the purposes of the affidavit was waved.  
 
Then the third contention is the weakest of all of 
them.  What is submitted is that large parts of the evidence 
are 
irrelevant 
and 
of 
little 
probative 
value. 
 
Now 
Chairperson, if I could take you please to paragraph 28.3 
10 
of the affidavit at page 15 and I would invite you 
Chairperson to read through these various paragraphs and 
ask yourself how conceivably can these things that are 
listed here be irrelevant.  
 
In fact it is hard to imagine with respect a greater 
relevance to the work of this commission within some of 
the things that are listed in this paragraph.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I see, ja I see particularly 28.3.6. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  This is highly admissible.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  All three legs that are relied upon are 
without merit.  We then come to the in camera part of 
things and really what I want to just direct your attention to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 223 of 416 
 
if I may, is paragraphs 34 and 35 of our submissions.  
 
Of course Chairperson, what needs to be done here 
is there must be a comparable waiting of competing rights 
or interests.  That is what caused this.  As in the case of 
courts, one of the factors to be weighed in the balance, is 
the importance of retaining the trust and confidence of the 
public in the proceedings of the commission, and also in its 
eventual findings and recommendation.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that it does not help Mr 
Solomon’s case that his client was a public representative.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, precisely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That does not help that case.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  DCJ, what we do is we sight some 
authorities at footnote 19.  If I could please take you to the 
flag that we have at the end of our heads.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Where we reproduce those three 
quotations, 
all 
judgments 
of 
the 
constitutional 
court.  
Obviously all in different contexts.  But what strikes a 
particular cord with us, is Shinga at the bottom.  Paragraph 
20 
25.   
 
The section makes dangerous inroads into our 
system 
of 
justice, 
which 
ordinarily 
requires 
court 
proceedings that affect the rights of parties to be heard in 
public.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 224 of 416 
 
 
These were criminal appeals in chambers.  It 
provides that an appeal can be determined by a judge 
behind closed doors and we say that this is equally 
[indistinct] and particularly important.  No member of the 
public will know what transpired. 
 
Nobody can be present at the hearing.  Far from 
having any merit, the provisions is amicable to the rule of 
the law, to the constitutional mandate of transparency into 
justice itself, and the danger must not be underestimated.  
Those court proceedings carry within them the seeds for 
10 
serious potential damage to every pillar on which every 
constitutional democracy is based. 
 
And then if I could take you to paragraph 35 and 
this is the point that you were raising with our learned 
friend: 
“The Commission is historically granted applications 
to mainly protect the identity of witnesses whose 
evidence is lead before the Commission.  Those 
applications were founded upon security threats to 
the lives and safety of witnesses, the Witness 
20 
Protection Act or the legislative and regulatory 
frameworks compelled a non-disclosure of that 
entity of persons or classified information.  Even in 
those grave circumstances, the presentation of 
evidence was not prohibited in any material respect 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 225 of 416 
 
from public consumption which the applicant seeks 
to achieve.” 
And perhaps I could just – because it is central and we 
dealt with it today, where the evidence of the three 
Transnet drivers, witnesses 1, 2 and 3 were hear in 
camera, they still appeared, they gave evidence.  Yes, 
their faces were blanked out, there is still a transcript of 
their affidavit, there is still an affidavit relating to the 
evidence.  What Mr Gigaba is for you to shut down this 
venue and for the public to know nothing about what 
10 
happens literally behind closed doors save for what you 
may write in your report.  We say there is simply no basis 
for that.  I do not know whether Mr Solomon dealt with the 
application for cross-examination but we only have one 
point to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he did not but he might have 
mentioned 
some 
things 
relating 
to 
these 
that 
are 
mentioned in the cross-examination application but I said 
to him let us leave out the cross-examination application 
for another day. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  So, Chairperson, the 
bottom line here is this is a highly relevant and admissible 
affidavit, it would do fundamental damage to the public 
perception of this Commission if we were to go literally 
behind doors. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 226 of 416 
 
 
And 
then 
insofar 
as 
Ms 
Gigaba’s 
letter 
is 
concerned, I do not want to prejudge what Ms Gigaba’s 
counsel may or may not make of this letter but it is not 
clear to me that Ms Gigaba is saying that she is not 
cooperating with the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think on the contrary… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She reaffirms or affirms her cooperation 
from what I – the bit that I have read, she seems to be 
suggesting that it might not even have been necessary for 
10 
a summons to be issued. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, that is the point I want to make 
in conclusion, DCJ.  Paragraphs 10 and 11, the last 
sentence of 10: 
“We are available to discuss the way forward in the 
spirit of cooperation and civic duty.” 
And then paragraph 11, at the end, she said that she has 
been treated poorly by the Commission, she has now been 
summoned 
with 
been 
given 
an 
opportunity 
to 
make 
submissions as to the necessity for the summons.  So yes, 
20 
she complained about the way that she has been handled, 
the Commission is an open book, she must ventilate that 
on the record, if she is allowed to give evidence, and those 
things must be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 227 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If there are errors in her affidavit 
well, those must be corrected. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Those are our submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Thank you.  Mr 
Solomon can I give you seven minutes in response? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   That should suffice, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Chair, we do not agree with our 
learned friend’s characterisation of our application as 
10 
based on the three legs that he has argued.  We say that 
our application deals with spousal testimonial privilege, 
which is the compellability issue, which he has not deal 
with.   
We say that we have raised that issue and we say 
that on a proper reading of her letter she has raised the 
compellability issue and where someone has a witness who 
is not disrespectful of the Commission in the sense that 
she refuses to come to the Commission – she says she is 
cooperating with the Commission but, as we read it, she is 
20 
exercising her spousal testimonial privilege concerning 
compellability and in that sense she should not be 
compelled to testify. 
 
Second point we have relied up is the marital 
communications privilege and that is Sections 198 and 199 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 228 of 416 
 
of the Criminal Procedure Act and we make the point, 
which our learned friend, with respect, has not addressed, 
that spousal testimony of privilege means a spouse cannot 
be compelled to give evidence in criminal proceedings 
against their spouse at all and we say there is no reason 
why that should not apply in these particular circumstances 
to the Commission and the work of the Commission and 
insofar as this particular application is concerned and we 
submit that it applies for two reasons.   
 
The discretion that you have in terms of Section 
10 
3(4) of the Commissions Act and secondly, it is principally 
to protect the institution of marriage, not just an accused, 
so it is far beyond the narrow argument that our learned 
friend is evoking and we submit that Mrs Gigaba is both not 
a compellable witness and is also entitled to raise marital 
communication privilege in response to questions arising 
out of the marital relationship.  And the mere fact that she 
mentions issues relevant to the mandate does not afford 
the nature of her evidence, probative weight or render her 
compellable in the sense that our learned friend although 
20 
has not argued but by implication. 
 
And of course, Chair, we make the point strongly 
that if the state capture legal team accepts that her 
evidence may be tainted by improper motive and that this 
is a matter for evidence, that point only really bolsters our 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 229 of 416 
 
argument that credibility needs to be tested and this is not 
the forum to descend into marital disputes and go and test 
credibility. 
 
So, 
Chair, 
in 
regard 
to 
the 
first 
leg 
of 
our 
application we submit that our learned friend has not put 
up any compelling reason why any of the arguments that 
we have advanced should not be accepted. 
 
Insofar as the question of in camera hearings, we 
have made our submissions, we stand by the concern we 
have that where in circumstances such as this, given the 
10 
stance now adopted by Mrs Gigaba it would be extremely 
prejudicial particularly to the children born of the marriage 
and 
we 
do 
not 
agree 
with 
our 
learned 
friend’s 
characterisation of the evidence and how it may or may not 
impact upon for that evidence to be aired fully in the full 
glare of the public eye.  We would then again ask you 
Chair to uphold our application that the affidavit be found 
inadmissible and that she should not be allowed to give 
evidence, as we have submitted, but in the alternative, is 
she is, that that should be done in a total protected 
20 
confidential in camera manner.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Solomon.  Prayer one is 
clear, prayer 2A, I am not sure what it means, Mr 
Solomons.  Mr Solomons? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   I am trying to unmute myself. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 230 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I am not sue – do you persist in that 
prayer? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Yes, that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is that for later? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   That is for later we would submit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Chair, you need not rule on that now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and then B is the in camera one. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and C? 
10 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   It goes together with B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is C for now or for later? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   I think it would be – it would go – it 
would be for now, Chair, because if you agree that it 
should be held in camera you will need to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if I were to grant B you would not 
need C, is it not, because it would follow from B. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   I think so, Chair, I think it is just 
belts and braces but I think you are correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if I am not prepared to grant B, what 
20 
would that make of C?  Would it survive that or not? 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   No, I do not think there would be 
much left of C in those circumstances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   And then D we have left open. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 231 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, D we leave for another day. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And your side can remain so to speak 
dominus litis in regard to that after today in terms of what 
is to be done and when it is done, we can look at that and 
see to what extent argument is necessary or whether I can 
just deal with it in chambers without hearing in – without 
oral argument. 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we look at that after today. 
10 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I am not going to give 
reasons for my decision but if anybody wishes to have 
reasons they can make a request in writing and reasons 
would be provided. 
RULING 
 
Having heard the application, I am satisfied that Mr 
Malusi Knowledge Nkanyezi Gigaba’s application for prayer 
one in his notice of motion should be dismissed and it is 
DISMISSED. 
20 
 
With regard to the alternative in prayer two that 
relates to Ms Mngoma, Mrs Gigaba’s evidence being her in 
camera, that also is DISMISSED. 
 
The application for leave to cross-examine will be 
dealt with at some other stage and any other relief that the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 232 of 416 
 
applicant makes it necessary to be dealt with at that stage, 
that is covered by the notice of motion. 
 
That 
is 
the 
decision, 
so 
the 
long 
and 
short 
…[intervenes] 
ADV SOLOMON SC:   As it pleases you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The long and short is that Ms 
Mngoma, Mrs Gigaba, may give evidence and will do so in 
the open.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   As you please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Shall we take ten minutes 
10 
adjournment and resume?  We will adjourn for ten minutes 
before we resume.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I am, Chairperson.  With your 
leave I understood that my learned friend would like to 
address you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, you can do so from where you 
are if your work is working and you will be comfortable, 
20 
okay? 
ADV QOFA:   Thank you, Chairperson, I was told the mic is 
in proper working order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV QOFA:   Through you, Chair, we have been requested 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 233 of 416 
 
specifically by Ms Gigaba that it is important before she is 
called to address you that the contents of the letter be 
placed on record so that whatever references she has to 
make or whatever address she has to make would be 
premises upon us having placed this letter on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is fine, that is fine. 
ADV QOFA:   Thank you very much, Chairperson.  I will 
therefore just try and go and swiftly as possible through 
the letter and it reads as follows.  Dated today: 
“The Honourable DCJ, we refer to the above matter 
10 
and in particular to this afternoon’s proceedings 
scheduled 
for 
the 
hearing 
of 
Ms 
Gigaba’s 
application as well as the leading of Ms Magma’s, 
our client’s evidence.   And impression has been 
created, it appears for us, wrongly that our client is 
reluctant 
or 
refuses 
to 
cooperate 
with 
the 
Commission.  We must clarify at the outset that our 
client does not wish to act in a manner which 
undermines the authority of the Commission or the 
Chairperson.  She is a law-abiding citizen who had 
20 
wished to play her civic duty in assisting the 
Commission to the best of her ability.  She has 
acted in the spirit throughout her engagement with 
the Commission.  Our client also has never had 
direct 
encounter 
with 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 234 of 416 
 
Commission, a person she holds in very high 
regard.  This is why she has decided that this letter 
should be addressed directly for the attention of the 
Chairperson as it is not clear whether or not he is 
fully aware of the issues raised herein.  Our client 
has taken the step of communicating directly with 
the Chairperson because she believes that there is 
animosity exhibited by the evidence leading team 
towards her which has led to the unnecessary and 
inexplicable issuing of summons.  Our client is not 
10 
an implicated person yet the summons is issued to 
compel 
her 
testimony 
as 
though 
she 
is 
an 
implicated person.  More importantly, she is not a 
compellable witness.  In this letter we will set our 
clients 
concerns 
which 
we 
understand 
the 
Chairperson has called for as the Commission is 
aware.  Our client was previously scheduled to give 
evidence 
on 
the 
9 
April 
2021 
and 
this 
was 
subsequently 
postponed 
at 
the 
Commission’s 
instance to the 13 April 2021.  However, on the 13 
20 
April we presented the Commission with a letter 
stating that our client, due to certain constraints 
that she has, would be withdrawing her participation 
in 
the 
Commission. 
 
This 
position 
was 
also 
reiterated when our Ms Makatini appeared before 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 235 of 416 
 
the Commission on the afternoon of 13 April 2021.  
During the said appearance the Chairperson asked 
for the details of the concerns that our client had 
and unfortunately we had at the time not had an 
opportunity to consult with our client for purposes 
of eliciting the details of concerns.  Following the 
proceedings of the 13 April 2021 as set out herein 
above, our client was served with a summons in 
terms of Section 3.2 of the Commissions Act 8 of 
1907 with rules of the Judicial Commission of 
10 
Inquiry into allegations of state capture, corruption 
and fraud in the public sector including organs of 
state published in Government Gazette 41774 of 16 
July 2018 to appear as a witness to give evidence 
before the Commission on the 26 April at four, at 
16h00.  The said summons were served at client’s 
place of residence on the 16 April 2021 during her 
temporary 
absence. 
 
Our 
client 
received 
the 
summons upon her return on Monday 19 April 2021 
and forwarded same to us on the 21 April 2021.  We 
20 
have now had an opportunity to consult with our 
client and she has reiterated that she has always 
given the Commission her full cooperation and 
respect.  However, the concerns outlines herein 
below and which the Chairperson requested that our 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 236 of 416 
 
client should spell out in detail have rendered it 
difficult 
for 
her 
to 
continue 
assisting 
the 
Commission.  The concerns raised by our client, 
some 
of 
which 
have 
been 
brought 
ot 
the 
Commission in the past our hereby listed below in 
compliance with the directive of the Chairperson. 
8.1 
On the eve of her initially scheduled appearance 
before the Commissioner 8 April 2021 she had to 
consult with the Commission’s new evidence leader, 
Adv Anton Myburgh SC, who had replaced Adv Paul 
10 
Pretorius 
SC. 
 
The 
change 
in 
counsel 
was 
destructive as our client’s previous counsel had 
specifically discussed with Adv Pretorius that he 
would lead her evidence.  It also became clear 
during the consultation that Adv Myburgh had 
previously 
not 
been 
favoured 
with 
a 
proper 
handover report of the issues and concerns already 
raised with Adv Pretorius.  There had been a few 
consultations between our client and Adv Pretorius 
previously and significant progress had been made 
20 
in preparing our client’s evidence.  This abrupt 
replacement of the evidence leader meant that our 
client had to go through the same process all over 
again.  It is traumatic for our client to be forced to 
repeat the events of her testimony since her 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 237 of 416 
 
marriage is in a state of collapse and there are 
minor children involved.  The Commission shows no 
consideration 
and 
empathy 
[indistinct] 
when 
it 
changes its legal teams for its own undisclosed 
reasons.  During the aforesaid consultation on the 8 
April 2021 our client pointed out to the evidence 
leaders that there were certain facts reflected in the 
affidavit that were not in her personal knowledge 
which needed to be discussed with her clarified.  AT 
the time of issuing of the summons this had not 
10 
been addressed.  When these issues were raised 
with 
the 
evidence 
leading 
the 
tone 
of 
Adv 
September was accusatory suggesting that it was 
our client’s fault that these errors were not picked 
up before the affidavits submitted.  Given her state 
of anxiety about the evidence which is against her 
current husband and gives details of her marriage 
and 
children. 
 
It 
is 
grossly 
unfair 
for 
the 
Commission evidence leaders to seek to shift blame 
to our client.  Instead, as previously suggested by 
20 
Adv Myburgh and agreed to by our client, these 
aspects 
could 
have 
been 
clarified 
in 
a 
supplementary affidavit.  Serious security concerns 
pertaining to our client’s safety had to been brought 
to the attention of the Commission.  An undertaking 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 238 of 416 
 
was made that the Commission would look into this 
aspect. 
 
Our 
client 
had 
not 
heard 
from 
the 
Commission in 
this regard nor has she 
been 
afforded any form of security or the courtesy of an 
explanation for the failure to do so.  Our client’s 
first affidavit was leaked to the media and she 
brought her dissatisfaction with this to the attention 
of the Commission.  This aspect exacerbated our 
client’s 
security 
concerns. 
 
The 
Commission 
undertook that it would investigate the source of the 
10 
leak and revert to our client.  No update has to date 
been furnished by the Commission to our client 
around this issue.  Our client also highlighted to the 
Commission her discomfort about the Commission 
sharing 
her 
affidavit 
with 
Ajay 
Gupta 
without 
informed her or her legal team.  It is mentioned that 
Ajay Gupta was implicated but he has not been in 
the country since the Commission started and there 
was no basis to share the affidavit with him.  The 
Commission has been wrongly suggesting that our 
20 
client volunteered to come to the Commission when 
the correct version is that she was approached by 
the Commission’s Mr Sakhile Masuku in December 
2020 
and 
she 
in 
turn 
agreed 
to 
assist 
the 
Commission in compliance with her civic duty and 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 239 of 416 
 
as a law-abiding citizen.  The letter must be read 
together with our letter dated 13 April 2021.  We 
trust that the above does set out the reasons for 
our client’s non-appearance on the 13 April and 
demonstrate that her decision to do so was not in 
defiance of the Commission but emanates from 
serious concerns which the Commission has failed 
to address.  This is further demonstrated by our 
client’s decision to attend physically today in order 
to explain her stance which she would have done 
10 
even in the absence of the unlawful [indistinct – 
dropping voice] We do not believe that the hostile 
and heavy-handed attitude adopted by the evidence 
leaders have assisted the process.  Our client has 
taken a risky decision to testify at her own expense 
and that of her children.  She is now being 
portrayed as a villain who is in breach of the 
Chairperson’s direction which is both wrong and 
unfortunate.  We are available to discuss the way 
forward in the spirit of cooperation and civic duty.  
20 
In the totality of the circumstances our client is of 
the firm view that the conduct of the Commission 
towards her has been abusive, discriminatory and 
disrespectful and no regard has been given to her 
rights and the traumatic experiences she has had to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 240 of 416 
 
endure at the hands of other law enforcement 
agencies in the past nine months, instead these 
experiences are being repeated for no justified 
reason.  She has now been summoned without 
being given an opportunity to make submissions as 
to the necessity of [indistinct – dropping voice].  We 
trust that the above is in order.  If the Chairperson 
deems it necessary, the above issues will be 
elaborated upon in an open forum.” 
The letter was signed Yours faithfully, RMC Attorneys.   
10 
 
Chairperson, this is basically the letter that we are 
aware, Chairperson, has been in hearings the whole day 
today and unfortunately as a result would have been 
unable to look at the contents of this letter.  However, what 
seek to do, Chairperson, is to persuade the Chairperson to 
consider this letter and, if necessary, allow Ms Gigaba to 
have the opportunity to say Chairperson, I am here 
because 
I 
respect 
without 
fail 
the 
process 
of 
this 
Commission.  She raised various concerns, Chairperson, 
which have been listed in paragraph 8 and all she does, 
20 
Chairperson, is to say I am humbly requesting that these 
issues that I raise be considered and if this letter fails to 
persuade the Chairperson, then Ms Gigaba is here and she 
will 
be 
able 
to 
explain 
any 
other 
issues 
that 
the 
Chairperson wishes [indistinct – dropping voice].  However, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 241 of 416 
 
if there is anything else that the Chairperson would like me 
to visit before you proceed, Chairperson, I will be happy to 
do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  But is the position 
that she is here on the basis that although she has 
concerns she is happy to assist the Commission or is the 
position that she has concerns, she is only here because 
she is compelled through the summons, otherwise she 
would not like to be here? 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, I will steal your words, actually 
10 
you summed it quite well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I want to know …[intervenes] 
ADV QOFA:   Alright, Chair, I think you have summed it 
quite well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because Mr Solomon was interpreting 
the letter in a certain way, that is the attorney’s letter, and 
I had received a certain impression of it which was 
different from what he was saying, so I want to hear from 
you exactly what her position is. 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, maybe I should start from the 
20 
onset by saying first of all, Ms Gigaba feels it is of 
paramount 
importance 
that 
if 
she 
can 
assist 
the 
Commission in any way she will be happy to do so.  The 
only grave concerns that she had, Chairperson, is that the 
affidavit before you does not demonstrate – first it contains 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 242 of 416 
 
information that – certain information that is not within 
knowledge, certain information that she has disputed and 
certain information that she does not agree with and she 
says, Chairperson, that unless that is brought clearly and 
explicitly to the Commission so that the Chair is aware, 
amongst others, that for instance Ms Gigaba is not happy 
with paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 or 1, 2, 3 and she says unless 
that is made clear to the Commission then the Chairperson 
and the Republic will be under the understanding that what 
is contained in that affidavit is what Ms Gigaba is saying.  
10 
Hence she is saying, Chairperson, through you, I am happy 
to file an affidavit to identify for the Chairperson all the 
aspects that I say do not reflect that which I would want to 
communicate to the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV QOFA:   I do also need to emphasise that she does 
[indistinct], 
Chairperson, 
that 
indeed 
she 
is 
not 
a 
compellable 
witness, 
she 
says 
so 
and 
she 
says, 
Chairperson, she believes that she enjoys the privilege – 
the long discussions that was had earlier, Chairperson, not 
20 
only 
the 
privilege 
that 
falls 
under 
marital 
privilege, 
Chairperson, further the privilege against self-incrimination 
and, Chairperson, what is critical …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the one of self-incrimination is 
separate. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 243 of 416 
 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed.  Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that stands on a different footing.  
Ja, okay, continue? 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson, absolutely, I agree.  
So, Chairperson, what she is just simply saying is, it is 
important for her to demonstrate to the Chair that she will 
not disrespect the direction of this Commission.  She 
expresses her reluctance in this letter not only on the 
basis that she feels she is uncompellable[sic] witness but 
she raises a plethora of issues that she feels have caused 
10 
her even further discomfort for participating further in the 
Commission.  Now, Chairperson, that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is like you are confusing me even 
more because when you started I thought you said she is 
saying she is happy to assist the Commission, she thinks it 
is an important job that it is doing but she just has certain 
concerns and particularly she is concerned that in her 
affidavit there may be certain or there are certain parts 
which are not within her personal knowledge and she would 
like or she would have liked to have done a supplementary 
20 
affidavit which would have identified those.  Now that is 
not a problem, that is somebody who says I want to assist 
but there is a problem with some of the – some parts of the 
affidavit but then when you went on …[intervenes] 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, I was going to point two. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 244 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is the instructions that are difficult? 
ADV QOFA:   So, I am sorry, Chairperson, maybe I am 
probably 
tripping 
over 
myself 
in 
the 
process, 
I 
do 
apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV QOFA:   But that is the first part to say I am unhappy 
with aspects of my affidavit for the reasons I will be 
advancing.  Then she goes further, she says I come here 
with absolute respect for the Commission and a civic duty 
that I take very seriously and she said that being the case, 
10 
I am married to Mr Gigaba still.  She said I believe for that 
reason alone, I am not a compellable witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And therefore I would not like to be here 
if I have a choice. 
ADV QOFA:   If I have a choice I would rather not be here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think that answers my question, 
not here by choice. 
ADV QOFA:   No, she is not here by choice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She is here because of the summons. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV QOFA:   Not only the summons but she raised that 
very issue, Chairperson, in the last paragraph of the letter 
where she says I am concerned with the fact that an 
impression 
has 
been 
created 
out 
there 
that 
I 
have 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 245 of 416 
 
volunteered to come to the Commission when in fact I was 
called by the Commission on this particular date and so on 
and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Well, I seem to have – I seem 
to remember that she gave an interview to one of the 
television stations and she said she would be prepared to 
give evidence before the Commission if she was asked to, 
is that not true? 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, to quote her specifically – and I 
hope I quote it as verbatim as she said it.  The response to 
10 
the question of whether or not she would be willing to 
come to the Commission was, if I am requested by the 
Commission to come through, I will be happy to assist my 
husband in issues where he needs me to help him 
remember.  I will not go further than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV QOFA:   But that is the response that she gave 
specifically to that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, alright.  Alright, thank you.  
Let me say, as I said earlier on, it is the duty of the 
20 
Commission when it becomes aware of anybody who might 
have knowledge of information about matters that fall 
within its terms of reference to approach that person and 
seek evidence, seek a statement, seek an affidavit and if it 
is satisfied that the person knows matters that are relevant 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 246 of 416 
 
and material to the Commission to ask that person to make 
themselves available and if they are not prepared to make 
themselves available to testify unless they are compelled, 
to compel then. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you might just be talking on 
television or you give an interview to a newspaper, you say 
something, if the Commission becomes aware that you may 
be having knowledge of matters that it is interested in, it 
will approach you. 
10 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it would be dereliction of duty if the 
Commission would be aware of that and not approach you 
when it appears that you may have information that falls 
within the terms of reference. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson, I agree totally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright, thank you.  And then 
let me just mention this.  All concerns that your client has 
about how the Commission may have treated her, how 
investigators may have treated her or the legal team, 
20 
requests that she may have made or whatever, she is – 
there is no problem articulating them.  I will hear Mr 
Myburgh who might be able to say something about them or 
some of them either now or at a later stage when they have 
had enough time to look at the contents of the letter but we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 247 of 416 
 
are interested in making sure that if anybody has concerns 
and they articulated them, we look at them and where we 
think the concerns have got merit, we will say so.  Where 
they can be addressed, we want them to be addressed. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed so, Chairperson.  In fact, that is the 
very reason why Ms Gigaba actually said – I think it is 
important, I think to some extent the Chair is not aware of 
the concerns that I keep raising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV QOFA:   And if I do not let the Chair into the picture 
10 
of my concerns… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV QOFA:   Then it means I would have not only been 
unfair to the Commission but at all times the Chair would 
believe that everything is going perfectly well and that 
there is no reason why I am not presenting myself as I 
should. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is very important.  I think 
earlier today I may have made – I may have referred to Mr 
Montana who was giving last week, former Group CEO of 
20 
PRASA, he had his own concerns, he chose to come and 
make his request very respectfully, articulated his concerns 
and they are being looked into.  Those that can still be 
addressed, attempts would be made to address them and 
he was allowed to continue to give evidence.  He is 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 248 of 416 
 
cooperating with the Commission and my own sense is that 
if anybody asks him he would tell them that he is being 
heard fairly but his concerns will be looked at and the 
Commission will go back to him and say on this one, we 
agree on this one, we do not agree on this one, this is the 
position so that he knows what has been done about that.  
So …[intervenes] 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson, I think Ms Gigaba is 
therefore right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So same thing with Ms Mngoma, Ms 
10 
Gigaba, and I think she will tell me just now which she 
prefers I must use.  If she has any concerns we will look at 
them and some we might not be able to address but those 
that we can address we try and address and where the 
Commission or the legal team or investigators might not 
have gone back to her, they try and go back to her on 
those. 
ADV QOFA:   Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  But maybe one thing 
that I can say about the change of the evidence leader 
20 
because I did hear that she expressed a concern about 
that.  I must say that I am responsible for that.  So it is not 
Mr Myburgh’s fault and it is not for any reason other than 
simply that Mr Pretorius is busy with certain matters, Mr 
Myburgh was busy with certain matters at a certain time 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 249 of 416 
 
and I said that in these circumstances let Mr Myburgh deal 
with the matter and – so it is nothing – but I understand 
that sometimes a particular person might find that maybe 
they deal better with a particular person or maybe that is 
not the issue, it is just that she had to now start afresh 
with somebody and tell the same story, so – but that 
decision came from me and it was simply a way of trying to 
see how best to use our resources. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, Chairperson, and I think she 
definitely understands that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV QOFA:   And in all honesty the schedule of the 
Commission has been quite hectic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV QOFA:   And I do not think anybody is not aware of 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, it happens quite frequently.  
Actually even today I just made another change in another 
work stream and said okay, this one will deal with that, this 
one will deal with that, so it happens quite frequently.  
20 
Okay, alright. 
ADV QOFA:   Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Mr Myburgh, would 
you like to say something? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson, subject to your 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 250 of 416 
 
direction I would prefer to lead Ms Gigaba’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I certainly do intend to respond to 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At some stage, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But I would not like that to interfere 
with the presentation of her evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   As you have mentioned there might 
be things here that we need to investigate and look at a bit 
10 
more carefully. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  Good evening, Ms 
Mngoma and you must tell us how you wish to be 
addressed.  Is it Ms Mngoma or Ms Gigaba or either is 
fine?  Which one do you prefer?  Either is fine?  Okay, 
alright.  Okay, you have been listening to the discussion, is 
that right?  The one thing which I did not mention to your 
counsel and maybe she – well, she is listening, is the issue 
of a supplementary affidavit.  I would imagine that she 
should be fine with a situation where as she goes along 
20 
with her affidavit, with her evidence, she can point out 
what 
she 
would 
have 
corrected 
in 
a 
supplementary 
affidavit, is that fine?  Just point on your mic. 
ADV QOFA:   Thank you, I thought to indicate, Chair, that 
when …[intervenes] 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 251 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   If necessary she can file it later on but 
as she goes along she says no, this is not accurate or 
something.  Would that be fine? 
ADV QOFA:   I would absolutely probably request that it 
may be helpful, Chair, that she files a supplementary 
affidavit first and I say this, Chair, for numerous reasons 
because 
you 
will 
see, 
Chair, 
when 
we 
filed 
the 
supplementary affidavit that not only does Ms Mngoma 
query the nature and the character of the evidence in 
addition to that which I have already indicated below but I 
10 
think rather, Chair, it would be helpful to the Commission 
to not have her go through the affidavit and correct it as 
she goes along.  I think it will be more helpful to the 
Commission that she highlights those areas that – and 
which 
she 
is 
going 
to 
indicate 
clearly 
why 
she 
is 
highlighting and why she is – her objections to those 
aspects 
and 
I 
truly 
think 
that 
for 
purposes 
of 
the 
Commission that may truly be a better approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you suggesting that her oral 
evidence should be postponed until she has filed a 
20 
supplementary affidavit? 
ADV QOFA:   Chair, we did make that suggestion 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV QOFA:   And I know indeed – I must say that it was 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 252 of 416 
 
very 
clear 
that 
of 
course 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, there is a problem with that. 
ADV QOFA:   Indeed, indeed, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what your side could have done or – 
well, I do not know how long ago you came into the matter 
but… 
ADV QOFA:  Very recently, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Her legal representatives could have 
prepared a supplementary affidavit even without involving 
10 
the legal team to say here are in here earlier affidavits that 
she wants to say A, B, C, D about and this could have been 
made available to the Commission and the evidence 
leaders much earlier or even if it was made available only 
today he would have been able to see it before she starts 
her oral evidence, but postponing is problematic because 
we don’t have the time. 
ADV QOFA:  Chair and I do apologise for that, I do 
appreciate that.  Unfortunately  Chair, and I will speak for 
myself 
in 
this 
regard, 
I 
came 
into 
this 
matter 
on 
20 
Wednesday last week, and unfortunately I had a family 
issue to attend to over the weekend, which I could not get 
out of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV QOFA:   And so I did say that if it wasn’t for that we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 253 of 416 
 
would have finalised the application, in fact we had started 
...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV QOFA:   It is just that the client feels that that 
affidavit must not only be in the draft format that we have 
now, it must be specific enough to identify why she is 
unhappy with paragraph 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV QOFA:   But otherwise what we have done was to 
globalise the issues so as to say we are not happy with the 
10 
affidavit because of the following, but her feeling is that no 
it must go specifically to paragraph as to why she disputes 
this and why she is not happy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.   No we will continue 
with your evidence Ms Mnogoma and – but in the end if 
there are aspects or parts of your affidavit that you believe 
do not correctly reflect the position you are free to indicate 
that.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes thank you.   Ms Gigaba the 
practice in the Commission is that I am going to take you 
20 
to your affidavit, take you to the last page where it was 
signed ...[intervenes]  
ADV QOFA:   I apologise – I apologise Chairperson I am 
getting a note here from my attorney that says it will be 
critical to highlight, and I apologise for missing this point, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 254 of 416 
 
that Ms Gigaba feels that the affidavit which she is being 
sought to be led on does not represent what she says, so 
far as to say, and I know that is not going to be a step by 
step, paragraph by paragraph evidence here you know, but 
it ought to be placed on record that he effectively says that 
the majority of that affidavit does not represent that which 
she says and even though she is the – the Chair says it is 
okay she must be left on that affidavit it should be brought 
to the attention of the Commission that it is primarily what 
she feels is not heard. 
10 
 
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine, at some – as we go 
along she must feel free to indicate what she believes does 
not reflect the position and she will have to say whether 
that’s what she said what is written, but on reflection she 
does not think it is true or whether she didn’t say it at all, 
but by the time she finishes if when Mr Myburgh has 
finished if she – if there are parts which were not touched 
upon which she wants to deal with and say they don’t 
reflect what the position is she will be allowed to say that. 
20 
 
Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Chairperson Ms 
Gigaba’s affidavits are Exhibit BB26, there are two of 
them.  Ms Gigaba could I take you please to page 999 
when we refer to pages they are the black numbers on the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 255 of 416 
 
left hand side, and we refer just to the last digits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is Transnet Bundle 7 Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I understand so Mr Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   999.  Are you there Ms Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now there is an affidavit, it starts at 
page 999, perhaps I could ask you to go through my 
learned colleague reminds me Chairperson that Ms Gigaba 
hasn’t yet been sworn in as a witness.   I do apologise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, no thank you for that.   Please 
administer the oath or affirmation, thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MS GIGABA:   [No audible response] 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS GIGABA:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
REGISTRAR:    Do you solemnly swear that all the 
evidence you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth.   If so please raise your right hand 
and say so help me God. 
MS GIGABA:   So help me God. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 256 of 416 
 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry they might not, you might have 
been speaking too softly Ms Gigaba, they might not have 
heard, is that the concern? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes I am told that the transcribers 
didn’t pick that up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please raise your voice so it will be 
recorded.   Okay, please start afresh. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MS GIGABA:   I am Nomachule Gigaba. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS GIGABA:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:    Do you solemnly swear that all the 
evidence you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth.   If so please raise your right hand 
and say so help me God. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:   Thank you. 
NOMACHULE GIGABA  [d.s.s.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it audible?   It is fine, oh, okay 
alright.  Thank you.  Mr Myburgh? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 257 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes thank you.  So at 999 if I can 
ask you then to turn to page 1016, you will see that’s the 
end of the affidavit.  1016 is the signature page Ms Gigaba 
and then – are you there, at 1016. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then attached to that affidavit 
are four annexures, A, B, C and D, pictures of the bag.  Do 
you see that?   
MS GIGABA:  Yes.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If I could ask you to go to page 
10 
1016, do I understand that you attested to this affidavit at 
Sandton on the 6 t h of March 2021. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And will you confirm the truth and 
accuracy of this affidavit, subject to any corrections that 
you will make during the course of your testimony? 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please repeat that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would you confirm the truth and 
accuracy of this affidavit subject to any corrections that 
you may make during the course of your evidence this 
20 
evening? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let’s – you might have formulated 
the question in a legal way.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Certainly. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 258 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Except for saying that in the course of 
your evidence you will point out those parts of this affidavit 
that you think are not the truth, or do not reflect the 
position, except for saying that are you happy to say those 
parts, other parts of the affidavit will be true and correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson might I then ask that 
you admit Ms Gigaba’s affidavit dated the 6 t h of March 
commencing at page – Bundle 7, 999, as Exhibit BB26.1. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Ms Nomachule Gigaba 
formerly Mngoma which starts at 8999 is admitted as an 
exhibit and will be marked as Exhibit BB26.1 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Ms Gigaba you will see 
that you then depose to another affidavit, it is a short one 
dealing with the threats. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You will find that at page 1021, and 
attached to that affidavit are – or is one annexure marked 
NS1, do you see that? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I ask you please to go to page 
1023 and would you confirm that you attested to this 
affidavit at Sandton also on the 6 t h of March 2021? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 259 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And would you similarly then subject 
to any corrections that you may make during the course of 
your evidence confirm the truth and accuracy of this 
affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:    Can you please rephrase that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s say are you confirming the 
correctness of this affidavit on the same basis as you did a 
few minutes ago the other one, namely there may be parts 
that you will point out during your evidence as being 
inaccurate or not correct, but those that the rest will be 
10 
true and correct. 
MS GIGABA:   On this part everything is correct yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh on this one everything is correct? 
MS GIGABA:    Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Chairperson if I could ask you to 
admit then Ms Gigaba’s affidavit dated the 6 t h of March 
commencing at bundle 7 page 1021 as Exhibit BB26.2 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Ms Nomachule Gigaba 
formerly Mngoma which starts at page 1021 is admitted as 
20 
an exhibit and will be marked as Exhibit BB26.2. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, Ms Gigaba if I could ask you 
then to go back to your first affidavit at page 999, are you 
there? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes I am. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 260 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, perhaps I could just start out 
by asking you are you in a position to confirm that you 
were at all times when this affidavit was being prepared 
represented by Senior Counsel? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And in fact he procured your 
signature of this affidavit, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, but I have concerns on that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, but I have concerns on that. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, we will come to that. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Ms Gigaba I wonder if I can just 
point this out to you.   I am going to ask you the questions 
because you speak quite faintly and you are more than 
entitled to do that, but I am going to ask you the questions, 
you need to direct your answers at the Chairperson, so you 
don’t need to – don’t feel you have to look at me when you 
are speaking, you must speak to the Chairperson, okay? 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so let’s start at paragraph 1, 
it says that you are an adult female businessman, a 
businessperson sorry, and you reside in Pretoria, is that 
correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 261 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when did you marry Mr Gigaba. 
MS GIGABA:   20 August 2014. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And are you still married? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes we are still married. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In paragraph 4 it says that on the 
21 s t and 22 n d of January the Commission interviewed you, 
is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes it is correct.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How did you come to be interviewed 
by the Commission? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Sakhile called me and he told me that the 
Commission wants to interview me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That’s Sakhile Masuku? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And was that after your ENCA 
interview?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes I received the call the day after the 
interview. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is it correct that you stated during 
the ENCA interview that you were prepared to assist the 
20 
Commission? 
MS GIGABA:   I said if the Commission calls me I will 
come and assist the Commission where Malusi does not 
remember, so according to me I wanted Malusi to come and 
give his evidence and then where he doesn’t remember or 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 262 of 416 
 
he doesn’t recall anything then I will say what I know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say at paragraph 5 at page 1000 
that you are assisted by your counsel, we know that your 
senior counsel, Thembeka Ncetobe, withdrew as your 
counsel and has now been replaced, but have your 
attorneys throughout been RMT Attorneys? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did they also assist you in the 
preparation of this affidavit? 
MS GIGABA:   My attorney was – never attended any of 
10 
this – when we were preparing for the evidence, he only 
attended once, the last one, where you were telling me that 
I need to come to the Commission, it was the first day I 
also saw you, and it was her first day as well.  So during 
the entire preparation of the evidence she never attended, 
I was only there with the Advocate ...[indistinct]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, so he attended without the 
attorney. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you are quite right, on the 8 t h of 
20 
April when we met your attorney came along. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then there are – there is 
a heading saying the government position is held by Malusi 
over the period from 2009 to 2019, and then they are 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 263 of 416 
 
listed, it says at paragraph 6 Mr Gigaba held positions 
tabled below over the years 2004 to 2018, do you confirm 
that he held those positions? 
MS GIGABA:   That is the first information that I didn’t put, 
all this information was collected by the Commission, and I 
raised that with them, because I never paid attention which 
Department he is working on, what does he do, which year, 
so I never pay attention on that so the Commission put 
that, it is not me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So presumably ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But does it accord with your knowledge 
or you don’t know whether it is true that he held these 
positions during these times? 
MS GIGABA:   I know that he held those positions but I am 
not sure about the times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About the dates? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, the years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So just to go through this you knew 
that at a certain point Mr Gigaba was the Deputy Minister 
20 
of the Department of Home Affairs, I think you go on to say 
in your affidavit that when you met him he occupied that 
position, isn’t that so? 
MS GIGABA:   That is correct. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
And 
can 
you 
remember 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 264 of 416 
 
approximately when that was, in what years? 
MS GIGABA:   It was 2010, 2009 to 2010 when we met, 
because we met in 2009. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay at that point he was the Deputy 
Minister of the Department of Home Affairs? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then can you recall when he 
became 
the 
Minister 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Public 
Enterprises, DPE, did he hold that position at a time? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes that time we were already together, it 
10 
was in 2010 if I am not mistaken. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then after that he became the 
Minister of the Department of Home Affairs, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   It is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you recall when that was? 
MS GIGABA:   Not exactly, because I never pay attention 
to the dates and everything, and I raised that during our 
consultation.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and then what was his final 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh.  So is the 
position that one of the things you would have corrected in 
terms of this paragraph is to say let’s not put the dates 
because I am not sure about the dates. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes I said that Chair. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 265 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Those positions I know about those 
positions. 
MS GIGABA:   I know the positions but I don’t know 
anything about the dates and I don’t want to be held 
accountable for the dates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   In case Malusi comes and says at that date 
I was not because I am not sure about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, no that is fine, that is fair 
enough. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And you recall then that the final 
ministerial position that he held ...[intervenes]   
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What was his last position as a 
Minister? 
MS GIGABA:   He was the Minister of Finance. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if you have a look at paragraph 
7 did Mr Gigaba ever say anything to you about being 
involved in ANC elections? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did he tell you? 
MS GIGABA:   I know at some point, I am not sure which 
day it was, then he said to me he was the head of 
elections. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you go on to deal with your 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 266 of 416 
 
relationship with Mr Gigaba and the Gigaba family, when 
did you meet Mr Gigaba for the first time? 
MS GIGABA:   I don’t remember meeting him for the first 
time? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well when did you meet him? 
MS GIGABA:   I don’t remember exactly, but I know that it 
was in 2009. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well I was actually getting at the 
year, I don’t need you to be more specific with the day. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so you say I met Mr Gigaba 
during 2009 and you have already told the Chairperson 
that at that time when you met him he was the Deputy 
Minister of the Department of Home Affairs, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes it is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And was there a time when you 
moved in with him into his Pretoria home? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you remember when that was? 
MS GIGABA:   I think it was the – it was in 2010. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And were you expecting a child at 
that point? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did Mr Gigaba provide you with any 
financial means when you moved in with him? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 267 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes he did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you explain that? 
MS GIGABA:   He gave me his card that he said I must use 
or if I want to go to the doctor or if I buy anything for the 
house. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When were you then subsequently 
married, you have already told us that was on the 30 t h of 
August 2014, correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Whereabouts is Mr Gigaba’s family 
10 
home situated? 
MS GIGABA:   In Mandeni ...[indistinct]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Gigaba, how many sisters does 
he have? 
MS GIGABA:   He has two sisters. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   One of them Gugu Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do you know where she is 
employed? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Whereabouts? 
MS GIGABA:   Transnet in Jo’burg. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And Mr Gigaba’s other sister, what is 
her name? 
MS GIGABA:   It is Nosipho. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 268 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do you know where she worked? 
MS GIGABA:   Last time I know she worked for Sahara, I 
am not sure about the name properly but it was the 
company for the Guptas, the one in Midrand, the Sahara 
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sahara Computers? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sahara Computers? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, and was there a time where 
she lived together with you and Mr Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now the next heading deals with 
meeting the Guptas and visits to the Gupta residence and 
you will see that that’s a part of the affidavit that goes on 
for that page, the next page, page 1033 and 1044, quite a 
lengthy section.  So let us work our way through this.  You 
refer in paragraph 12 to the fact that from the time that you 
met Mr Gigaba, when he was the Deputy Minister of the 
20 
Department of Home Affairs he would visit certain persons, 
is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who did he refer to those 
persons as?   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 269 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   That time as his advisors.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He referred to them as? 
MS GIGABA:   Advisors. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Advisors, and did he explain to you 
what he was doing in meeting with his advisors? 
MS GIGABA:   So there are times I will be confused when 
he talks about advisors, because sometimes he will be with 
Thami Msomi because he introduced Thami to me as a 
friend and an advisor but then later stage he will say I am 
going to see an advisor and then I already saw Thami then 
10 
I will ask who are the advisors, then he will ...[indistinct] 
them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So at this point in time did you know 
who his advisors were? 
MS GIGABA:   Not exactly. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And if I understand your evidence 
did you make a presumption, did you presume that he was 
talking about Thami Msomi? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:    And who was he.  
20 
MS GIGABA:   I think at that time Thami was the Chief of 
Staff at Home Affairs. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You then go on to say – you talk 
about something having happened two or three months 
before Mr Gigaba took up the position of Minister of DPE, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 270 of 416 
 
can you remember what happened? 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please rephrase that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   At paragraph 13 you deal with 
something that occurred two or three months before he 
took up the position as the Minister of DPE. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What happened? 
MS GIGABA:   He told me that he will move to the 
Department of DPE and I asked him what is DPE because I 
didn’t know what is DPE at that time. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he tell you where he had 
received this, or from whom he had received this news that 
he was going to move to being the Minister of the DPE? 
MS GIGABA:   Malusi said he heard it from Ajay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ajay who? 
MS GIGABA:   Ajay Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that before he moved to the 
Department of Public Enterprises? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he told you that? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know how long before he actually 
moved or can’t ...[indistinct]  
MS GIGABA:   I think it was two to three months before he 
moved. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 271 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And at that point in time had you met 
Mr Ajay Gupta? 
MS GIGABA:   Not yet. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then perhaps you could tell us 
how often did Mr Gigaba visit his so-called advisors once 
he became the Minister of the DPE, can you remember? 
MS GIGABA:   I don’t remember exactly how many times 
but what I know when he was at DPE he will go more often. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can you recall – remember how he felt 
10 
about this news that he had been told namely that he was 
going to move to DPE, can you remember how he felt about 
it? 
MS GIGABA:   He was excited about it, that’s why I even 
asked what is DPE, so then he explained to me what is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   Okay Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  So you say 
when he became the Minister of the DPE he went there to 
meet his advisors more often, is that what you said? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And was there a time when you 
asked him about who are these advisors? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What was his response? 
MS GIGABA:   Then he told me that his official, unofficial 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 272 of 416 
 
advisors, people who are advising him about certain 
decisions, about his work then he differentiate them from 
the advisors that he had at DPE which I know of them, 
which is his legal advisor and Thami Msomi as well. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he tell you who these unofficial 
advisors were? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes he told me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did he say? 
MS GIGABA:   It was the Guptas, Ajay and his brothers 
which I don’t know all of them by names, because I only 
10 
hear from Ajay more than the other ones. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he tell you what they advised 
him about? 
MS GIGABA:   He said they were advising him about work, 
about things that he was supposed to do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did the frequency of Mr Gigaba’s 
visits 
to 
the 
Guptas 
ever 
cause 
you 
concern 
or 
unhappiness? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you explain that? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   I was not comfortable with that because we 
have a young child at home, which I don’t want to talk 
more about that, I don’t want to involve my kids on this. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when you raised that concern 
with him what was his response? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 273 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Then he said he will introduce me to them 
so that I can be comfortable with them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did he tell you why he needed to 
meet these advisors? 
MS GIGABA:   The reason is that he needs to – sort of I 
can understand when he is with them who are they. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see.   Now in paragraph 16 you 
deal with Mr Gigaba’s visits to his advisors when it was 
sitting and then when Parliament was in recess perhaps you 
could just take the Chairperson through that.  
10 
MS GIGABA:  Can you please repeat your question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So when Parliament – when Parliament 
was sitting now when would Mr Gigaba go to Cape Town in a 
typical week? 
MS GIGABA: Most of the time he will go on Monday 
evenings or he would leave on Tuesday mornings. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Monday evening or Tuesday morning? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And when would he come back? 
MS GIGABA:  He will come back on Thursday evenings or 
20 
Friday mornings. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And would he then when Parliament 
was sitting would he inform you as to when he was going to 
the Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  Sometimes he will go before he flies to Cape 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 274 of 416 
 
Town or sometimes he will go when he comes back from 
Cape Town. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So that would either on the Monday 
morning or the Friday evening? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then when Parliament was in 
recess? 
MS GIGABA:  He will go anytime. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how would these meetings come 
about? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  What do you mean by that question could 
please ask the question again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So how do you know that he went 
to the Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  Oh because he will tell me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He would tell you? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When did you first meet Mr Gigaba’s 
advisors? 
MS GIGABA:  You mean the Gupta’s? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  Oh when our son was born. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry. 
MS GIGABA:  When our first son was born. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And in what year was that? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 275 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  It was in 2011. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  2011. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And how did that meeting come about 
you deal with this at paragraph 17.1? 
MS GIGABA:  Because Ajay wanted to meet our son so he 
told me like a few times that he wants to meet our son. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And did you agree then to go to the 
Gupta’s residence? 
MS GIGABA:  Not on the first time he told me but eventually 
10 
I agreed after a certain time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But you then did go there? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes I went there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And who did you meet at the Gupta 
residence on this first visit? 
MS GIGABA:  Ajay, his wife, her son ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what happened during the course 
of that meeting? 
MS GIGABA:  It was not a meeting it was a visit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Oh well what happened during that 
20 
visit? 
MS GIGABA:  He greeted me, my son we spoke but it was 
like a – any visit that you will have when you visit someone 
you welcome them.  But it was not a formal meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And did they give your son any gift of 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 276 of 416 
 
any sort? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Can you remember what it was? 
MS GIGABA:  Ajay gave – Ajay gave my son a necklace but 
Malusi took it so he never had it.  He never used it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I did not hear the last part of 
your – say what you said.  After but I did not hear what you 
said. 
MS GIGABA:  Okay I am saying Ajay gave him a necklace 
which Malusi took it then he kept it.  So he never ever gave 
10 
it to my son. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What was the necklace made of? 
MS GIGABA:  It was a gold necklace. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now that is in 2011 so that was your 
first visit.  What happened in 2012? 
MS GIGABA:  In terms of visiting or in terms of (talking over 
one another) 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In terms of visiting the Saxonwold 
compound.  Did you go there in 2012? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes we did go visit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How often did you go to the Saxonwold 
residence in 2012? 
MS GIGABA:  Sometimes he will go with me, sometimes he 
will go with his protectors. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 277 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No I am asking you yourself how often 
did you go in 2012? 
MS GIGABA:  We would go often but not every day or 
weekly.  It will depend on him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that in the affidavit paragraph 17.2 
you say: 
“On several occasions during 2012.” 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Now your second son 
when was he born? 
MS GIGABA:  2012. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Can you remember the month – I 
remember telling you that I noticed that your second son was 
born on Christmas day. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes he wa. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  25t h of December. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you – did you then have occasion 
to visit the Gupta’s again? 
MS GIGABA:  Not then but we went after a few months was 
gone. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And why did you go to the Gupta’s 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 278 of 416 
 
after your second son was born? 
MS GIGABA:  They wanted to meet my second born. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were to? 
MS GIGABA:  They wanted – they wanted to meet my 
second born. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now in 2013 did you attend the Gupta 
wedding? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right.  Now you in paragraphs 19 and 
10 
20 deal with the Waterkloof Airforce Base do you want to just 
deal with that? 
MS GIGABA:  And the question again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you go to the Waterkloof Airforce 
Base? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you go there before or after the 
wedding? 
MS GIGABA:  I only went before the wedding. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was it the day before? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  It was the day before. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Can you remember what day of the 
week that was? 
MS GIGABA:  I do not remember because I do not remember 
what day was their wedding but it was a day before the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 279 of 416 
 
wedding. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now how did it come about that you 
went to Waterkloof? 
MS GIGABA:  Malusi asked me to accompany him to go 
welcome the Gupta family at Waterkloof Airforce. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what did you do there? 
MS GIGABA:  What did I do? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  I went there with him.  We waited for them so 
– but I sat inside the airport with my – with my son so he 
10 
went out to fetch them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then what…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am not sure – I just want to make 
sure that – so the two of you and your sons went to 
Waterkloof, is that right? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and the purpose of going there was 
to … 
MS GIGABA:  Welcome the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was to welcome the guests. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Gupta’s? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Guests. Okay. And you brought your sons 
with you? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 280 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  Not sons we only took the older one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The older one? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright thank you.  Continue Mr 
Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes thank you and then on the day of 
the Gupta wedding did you accompany Mr Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes to the wedding. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And this paragraph then and you have 
– you have indicated to me during our consultation that there 
10 
is an error and we pointed it out to you because it reflects 
paragraph 20. 
“That we packed and were escorted to attend the Waterkloof 
to receive the Gupta aircraft.  When we left Waterkloof there 
were many blue light vehicles and Metro police.” 
That is a sentence that could either be deleted or should find 
its way into paragraph 19, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  I prefer to – to repeat as I repeated again 
when I was raising the concern about it.  I prefer to say it in 
my own words because what I saw. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright but you only mention. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Say it in your own words. 
MS GIGABA:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Say it in your own words. 
MS GIGABA:  We only went once at the airport at the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 281 of 416 
 
Waterkloof Airforce it was the day before in the evening 
when the Gupta aircraft landed.  Then I stayed inside the 
airport in that room and then Malusi went out to fetch them.  
Then after that all the members were escorted to the cars 
and then we were taken by our protectors to go to our car. 
So when we left the airport we went home and then I saw a 
lot of blue lights escorting the members of he Gupta’s when 
they were leaving at the airport.  So we did not go again 
because here somewhere it mentions like we went there 
twice which we were never there twice.  It was the day 
10 
before then on the day of the wedding I was at work and 
Malusi called me that we have to go to the wedding and I 
was shocked why – I cannot just attend a wedding like that 
because I wanted to do my hair, I needed to buy some things 
but he said we need to go someone else to go to the 
wedding and then I had to leave work and then we home and 
we packed we went to the wedding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay alright. 
MS GIGABA:  But it was not something was planned to go to 
the wedding according to my knowledge. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just one second Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you when you were at the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburg. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  Will the technicians 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 282 of 416 
 
please switch off this screen here because it is distracting 
me. Okay alright we can continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Did you meet any of the 
Gupta family whilst you were at the wedding? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes we –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just switch on your mic Ms Gigaba. 
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry you said Ms Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:  I was saying yes we met but it was a lot of 
them. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It was? 
MS GIGABA:  It was a lot of them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MS GIGABA:  But I was not familiar with them because most 
of them they were coming from India. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You refer in this paragraph 20 to a 
facebook photo what happened there? 
MS GIGABA:  When we at the wedding so a lot of ladies 
were doing something called Henna it was like a design that 
they do it in the hand and I asked to join to do it as well.  
20 
And then later because it was my first time doing it I posted 
it on my facebook and then I think it was later at night Malusi 
told me because we were supposed to sleep there because 
they booked for us. So Malusi told me that we need to go 
home we cannot sleep and because there were already 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 283 of 416 
 
something on the media that we attended the wedding and 
that Malusi was complaining that that is why he did not even 
want to attend the wedding so we need to go home. So then 
after that he said I need to delete someone called him.  So I 
do not know who called him to tell me that I must delete the 
picture that I posted on the wedding of that Henna design.  
So I went on my facebook I deleted it.  So the following day I 
wanted to remove it but I did not even know that it does not 
– can be removed so it was – I think it stayed there for the 
whole week but I deleted on facebook. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright now after the Gupta wedding di 
you continue to go to the Gupta residence in Saxonwold? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes we did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How often would you go there? 
MS GIGABA:  We will go maybe during the week or weekend 
it will depend. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then what you do at paragraph 22 is 
you explain the procedure that would be followed each time 
you attended the Gupta residence.  Please explain that?  Tell 
us about the procedure?  How did it work practically? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  So every time when you come in there is 
security which is our protectors.  So they will tell their 
protectors because there were a lot of protectors outside 
who will be there and they will tell them that we here and 
they will open.  And one of them will take us in the house 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 284 of 416 
 
and then someone will come and call – will go and call Ajay 
and then someone will come maybe offer us some drinks or 
something then later Ajay will come and talk to us.  Then 
mostly it was like that all the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So can I just ask you to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  The transcribers can you 
hear the witness well?  Okay alright.  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Gigaba do you mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I am actually struggling to hear you 
10 
can you speak a little bit louder.  I cannot see your … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Try and speak up a bit. 
MS GIGABA:  Because we gave exhaustedly – so I am so 
tired.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright so you were saying that Ajay 
would arrive just explain how that would work? 
MS GIGABA:  Say that again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When you went to the – the Gupta 
residence 
you 
gained 
access 
into 
the 
house 
or 
the 
residence.  You mentioned that Ajay would then arrive. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay and what will happen then? 
MS GIGABA:  Then he will greet us.  If we are just there 
went there for a visit so we would sit with him – we talk but if 
it is a meeting he will come brief Malusi about something 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 285 of 416 
 
they will go in the meeting then I will stay in the room at the 
lounge. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And would you have your cell phone 
with you? 
MS GIGABA:  No.  But sometimes I will go fetch my cell 
phone. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What happened with your cell phones 
when you went to the Gupta residence? 
MS GIGABA:  They always ask us to leave them at the – I 
think it is like a foyer and then we will go leave them there.  
10 
And then later I will go take my phone when I am bored – if I 
am bored. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And who would you see when you went 
to the Gupta residence? 
MS GIGABA:  Say that again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Who would you see?  Would you see 
other people – people you knew when you went to the Gupta 
residence? 
MS GIGABA:  The only people I saw it was Ajay, his wife, his 
brother, his son, Thami Msomi and Siyabonga Mahlangu.  
20 
They are the only people that I saw. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So Mr Msomi you have told us about.  
Mr Mahlangu who was he? 
MS GIGABA:  Say that again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Who was Mr Mahlangu? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 286 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  He was Malusi’s legal advisor. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And where would these meetings be 
held between Ajay and Mr Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:  They will be in the opposite room from the 
lounge. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did you ever ask Mr Gigaba why you 
had to turn in your cell phone? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what did he say? 
MS GIGABA:  Because he said some of the information was 
10 
confidential so we had to leave our phones. But it was not 
something was strange for him because most of the time 
when I call him his phone will be answered maybe when he 
is at work his phone will be answered by his PA or maybe 
when they are in the NEC they will leave – for him was their 
nature but for me I did not understand why must I leave my 
phone. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now you have mentioned to us that 
you saw Mr Ajay Gupta, Mr Mahlangu and Mr Msomi. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  There did you see anybody else 
attending meetings? 
MS GIGABA:  No.  But I knew that they were inside because 
you can hear voices of people in the room and when Ajay will 
come and brief him I know that there will be people but I do 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 287 of 416 
 
not want to say who was there because I have never seen 
them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And when you went to the residence 
did you sometimes find cars already parked there? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes there were a lot of cars. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What sort of cars? 
MS GIGABA:  Cars similar to our cars which is like state 
cars. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay how did you know they were 
state cars? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  Because of the blue lights at the front and I 
also the body guards because most of them they dress the 
same and the car they most similar.  It is either the – I do 
not know how to explain the nature of the cars but it is a bit 
similar most of the cars. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now you have mentioned that when 
you went to the Gupta residence Ajay would meet with you 
and he would hold discussions with Mr Gigaba and then they 
would go off to the meeting room.  What sorts of things 
would be discussed in your presence between Mr Ajay Gupta 
20 
and Mr Gigaba before they went for a meeting? 
MS GIGABA:  It was not discussing it was like briefs. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright. 
MS GIGABA:  He was briefing him not like discussion. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what was Mr – or what was Ajay 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 288 of 416 
 
Gupta briefing Mr Gigaba about?  What was the sorts of 
things that he briefed him about? 
MS GIGABA:  So sometime he will brief him about the SAA 
or he will brief him about Transnet or he sets a meeting that 
they will talk about so that he is aware before he goes to the 
meeting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And can you remember what – what 
was discussed or what was briefed in relation to Transnet? 
MS GIGABA:  Most of the time in Transnet it will be the 
people that Ajay feels like they need to be appointed or need 
10 
to leave or maybe they are restricting and maybe they will 
just argue a little bit about it because Malusi had his own 
favourites of people and Ajay has his own favourites of 
people. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what – what did you hear about 
SAA? 
MS GIGABA:  SAA most of the time they will – they will – 
when he is with Ajay they will be talking about the board so 
he will be asking him about the board or maybe Kalawe 
because there was a lot of discomfort between Malusi and 
20 
the chairperson of SAA. So sometimes they will discuss that. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Which 
chairperson 
of 
SAA 
are 
you 
referring? 
MS GIGABA:  That time Nomwabisi Kalawe was the CEO 
then Dudu Myeni was the chairperson and I think Malusi 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 289 of 416 
 
liked Nomwabisi Kalawe and Dudu did not like him and they 
will have those arguments most of the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And during these briefing sessions did 
you ever hear any mention made of Eskom? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what – what was said about 
Eskom? 
MS GIGABA:  There was a time Mr Brian Dames was the 
CEO of Eskom and what I remember Malusi liked Brian 
10 
Dames and there was a certain time then the Gupta’s did not 
like him especially Ajay let me not say Gupta’s because it 
was most of the time it was Ajay and Ajay did not like him. 
So he will say Brain Dames needs to resign he was 
uncomfortable about certain things but he will be talking to 
him not to me and then Malusi liked Brian Dames.  I think 
even myself I liked him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright and then was there ever a time 
where Mr Gigaba held a discussion with you about Mr 
Dames? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What did he say? 
MS GIGABA:  He told me that the Gupta’s do not like him 
and he does not understand why they do not like him.  And I 
think they told him that there will be a new restructuring 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 290 of 416 
 
someone else will move to Eskom and then Brian Dames will 
leave but I did not know how the process is going to happen 
which a few months later it happened. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  These visits to the Gupta 
residence how long would they last for usually? 
MS GIGABA:  Hour to two hours but not more than that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  An hour to two hours? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then at page 1005 it deals – 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Myburgh I just want to make 
10 
sure that I understood this.  Paragraph 26 of your affidavit. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say at some stage Mr Gigaba told me 
that Mr Ajay Gupta wanted him to get rid of Mr Brian Dames.  
Having met Mr Dames I asked Mr Gigaba why and he said 
that the Gupta’s did not like Mr Dames because there are 
things that Mr Dames was supposed to do but did not do 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Ms Gigaba 
you then go on to deal with meetings held at our home.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 291 of 416 
 
Whereabouts was that?  Was that the ministerial home in 
Pretoria? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And you start by dealing with 
meetings with the Gupta’s. 
MS GIGABA:  It was not a lot of meetings. I think Ajay only 
came to us 00:23:20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He came to your home? 
MS GIGABA:  Sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You say that Ajay came to your home? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Right how many times? 
MS GIGABA:  I only remember twice. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And whereabouts – what did he do 
there? 
MS GIGABA:  Mainly meetings but he it was the two of them 
in the meetings so I was not a part of the meetings but I saw 
him because I went to greet him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And whereabouts in what room were 
the meetings held? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  So the way the house is structured there is an 
upstairs because when I said it was underground they 
questioned me. So let me not say it was underground it was 
a downstairs.  So all of us are staying upstairs and when you 
go down with the steps there is a room that is under which 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 292 of 416 
 
Malusi used as his study or meeting room – ja so Ajay was 
there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  And did Mr Gigaba tell you 
what he was meeting Ajay Gupta about? 
MS GIGABA:  I think that time there was this – there was 
some projects at Eskom it was called Kusile Projects.  I think 
that project was giving Malusi a lot of sleepless nights and 
then he was – then he said no Ajay was here to give him – 
they were discussing Eskom Kusile but he did not give me all 
the details about it. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what Eskom project was giving Mr 
Gigaba sleepless nights? 
MS GIGABA:  I only remember Kusile Projects. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry. 
MS GIGABA:  I only remember Kusile Projects. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then you go on to deal with meetings 
with Mr Gigaba’s staff.  Was there a time where his staff 
visited your home? 
MS GIGABA:  It was a Ministerial staff.  So there is a staff of 
the department and there is a Minister of Staff. So Minister 
20 
of Staff it is people that he travels with wherever he - it is 
either he goes to Cape Town he comes back then the 
department.  But most of the time if it is a Minister of Staff 
maybe one person will come from the department maybe 
00:26:05 them it is the – if we are travelling on the state’s.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 293 of 416 
 
Maybe sometimes it will be the DG or they will chose 
whoever is relevant to the trip so he will come and brief the 
entire ministerial team. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright can I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I – I am sorry Mr Myburgh can I go 
back to paragraph 29?  Did it ever happen that Mr Gigaba 
told you that he and Mr Gupta – Ajay Gupta were discussing 
any projects at Transnet? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh tell me about that. 
10 
MS GIGABA:  So they used to talk about maybe renewing 
contracts maybe Ajay will ask Malusi no there is a project 
needs to be renewed or maybe someone needs to sign a 
certain project but I do not know exactly who needs to sign it 
but they will talk about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Now you go on at 
paragraph or in 30 and 30.1 you deal with a trip to Mumbai 
and New Delhi and what we identified during our consultation 
you will remember is that there is an error.  This is another 
20 
area where there is an error. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In the affidavit because it says at 30.1: 
“During the last period of Mr Gigaba’s tenure 
as Deputy Minister of Home Affairs” 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 294 of 416 
 
Now that would have been in late 2010 you go on to talk 
about a trip in 2010 to India.  In what year did that trip 
actually occur? 
MS GIGABA:  I said to people who were leading because 
you were not there to people who were leading this part I 
said to them I do not want to say exactly which year because 
I do not have my passport with me.  I remember there was a 
trip to India but I do not remember exactly when was it.  And 
then when the affidavit came it was written this year and I 
even mentioned to say okay that I do not want to be 
10 
accountable for the year exactly but I remember we went to 
India to Mumbai. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.  So we know from Mr Gigaba’s 
affidavit that he says it happened in 2015 do you accept that 
now? 
MS GIGABA:  If he says so. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay.   
MS GIGABA:  Because I do not have my passport because 
after – on that day we were talking about this I said to the 
commission team I will go check my passport at home so 
20 
what I have done on my way when I was leaving where we 
had the meeting with the commission team I called his 
former PA then I asked her about my passport – the state 
passport because we do not keep those passports with us.  
And then – because I wanted to know exactly when did we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 295 of 416 
 
go then she said she is going to come back to me.  By the 
time I arrived at home because my passport was there before 
– when – before I left because I wanted to remember certain 
trips because we were travelling a lot because I had two 
separate passports.  I have the normal passports then we 
have the diplomat passports.  So when I got home on that 
day after calling his PA my passport was not there and my 
two kids passport was still there.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright so this is a part of your affidavit 
that I understand you would want to correct. 
10 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  In a supplementary affidavit because it 
may very well be that the change of the date then has knock-
on effect as these things often do.  But presently do you 
remember what happened in India, what was the purpose of 
this trip? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not remember exactly but what I heard 
what Malusi was talking about.  They were talking about to 
meet some – what is it – the Gupta family members, some 
people who were working – who were going to assist in 
20 
working and the Mumbai trip because there was an airline 
that they used to talk about when he was at DPE.  So there 
were people who used to come working, their permits.   
 
So most of the times they would talk about the 
permits of – from Gupta family.  So I do not know how that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 296 of 416 
 
was facilitated because I remember when Malusi was 
saying it is not easy for him to go to India when it is not a 
state trip because everyone will question.  So, then – I do 
not know how it ended up, it was a state trip.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And in India, who did you 
travel with?  Who did Mr Gigaba travel with? 
MS GIGABA:   With his staff. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would that have included Mr Msomi? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you say that they had attended 
10 
various meetings.   
“I did not see with whom they met as I was out 
shopping when they attended the meetings.”   
 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then you deal with the 
Johannesburg/Mumbai flight route.  What happened there? 
MS GIGABA:   What I know about it.  It is - when he was 
still at DPE, they used to talk about the Mumbai Route that 
– I think it was South African Airlines that they need to 
20 
console(?) and under(?) the route from Mumbai need to 
take over.  So they used to have a lot of discussions about 
that.  That is what I only can remember. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just whilst we are on this issue of a 
supplementary affidavit.  As I understand it, because it has 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 297 of 416 
 
been shared with me.  Mr Ngetobi(?), your counsel, 
actually prepared a draft supplementary affidavit. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   After our consultation on the 
8 t h of April, was it? 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And this was – you would have seen, 
was one of the paragraphs that is addressed in there. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You confirm that? 
10 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, if I may? 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV QOFA:   I would like to – I have had this discussion 
earlier.  We have concerns about affidavits that the client 
says have to be specific to her.  She must have read them 
and she has made it clear that she will not give any 
evidence 
on 
drafts 
that 
she 
has 
not 
particularly 
commissioned.  And therefore I request that the issue on 
the draft affidavit not be led, Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think Mr Myburgh is – all 
Mr Myburgh is trying to do is to check whether this is one 
of the affidavits which are going to be the subject of 
corrections in the supplementary affidavit. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 298 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So I think Mr Myburgh wanted 
to be fair so that we know that we must not take this 
affidavit, this paragraph as not subject to corrections. 
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, if I understood correctly and 
maybe I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV QOFA:   What Mr Myburgh is suggesting to the 
witness is that there is a draft supplementary affidavit that 
he is in possession of which he says corrects some of the 
issues that have been dealt with. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV QOFA:   And what I have indicated, even prior to the 
sitting to Mr Myburgh is that the draft affidavit which he 
has been furnished with is but a drop(?), according to the 
witness.  There is – the witness has been clear.  Nothing 
should be discussed in the Commission until I have 
personally commissioned an affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV QOFA:   To do so would be premature because 
whatever draft supplementary affidavit that is before him 
20 
and not before this Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I ...[intervenes]  
ADV QOFA:   ...is not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I...  Mr Myburgh has not said – has not 
responded to you but I have a very good sense that he was 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 299 of 416 
 
not saying that because he wants to hold the witness to 
whatever is in the draft affidavit.  I do not think he wanted 
to – I think that is what you maybe be concerned with.  I do 
not think ...[intervenes]  
ADV QOFA:   Chairperson, maybe he can clarify it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think Mr Myburgh ...[intervenes]  
ADV 
QOFA: 
 
 
Because 
that 
is 
a 
concern 
for 
us 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not think Mr Myburgh wants to say 
later on:  I saw that affidavit.  This is what it was saying.  
10 
Or anything like that.  No, no.  I do not think.  Mr Myburgh, 
talk for yourself. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No, absolutely, DCJ.  I mean, that 
the simple point.  I am not suggesting that the witness is 
bound by any affidavit and of course she can say what she 
wants to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But the simple point is that during 
the consultation on the 8 t h of April, it was identified that 
there was a problem with this paragraph. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I alerted Mr Ngetobi(?)  [00:05:26] to 
that and as I understand it, he set about working on a draft 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 300 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The reason that I highlight that is 
there is no point in me then taking this witness through 
every single line of all these paragraphs because it need to 
be amended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because you know there is a problem, 
ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS GIGABA:   Can I say something on that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please do. 
MS GIGABA:   I think what ...[indistinct] is trying to 
highlight because if we corrected this because I raised 
these issues before even ...[indistinct] was given in my 
affidavit.  And when Malusi heard my affidavit, he was 
given my affidavit.  On their response on my affidavit they 
went for those errors and they were given an upper hand 
like it looks like I was lying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   A certain nature(?) [00:06:19] did not 
20 
happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   But if the Commission have listened when 
we were consulting because I raised those issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 301 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Because I think some of the things, when 
we wrote them they did not put it in my words and now 
when Malusi lawyers and himself responded to them, now 
they are just questioning most of all those errors because 
they know it did not happen like that because in the 
...[indistinct] happened ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   ...that the fact remains but now the only 
part is the year(?) or what happened.  So now we have 
been choosing the words. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Because they know it is not exactly like 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   But if we have addressed those issues 
before we will not be faced by this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   And also, I will be comfortable to answer 
this question and hence I said I did not come to give my 
evidence the time when I was supposed to come because I 
20 
did not want to say things because they are written and 
then one day someone will hold me accountable to say I 
have said this and I did not say it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   So, because I think the way it is written 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 302 of 416 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Things that she said.  And what they 
highlighted, 
all 
of 
them, 
which 
is 
the 
affidavit 
of 
Noma/Soma(?) [00:07:32]  So it is.  I - Siyabonga Gama – I 
Soma(?) this is...  What they were – they highlight more is 
the errors that I made.  But it was – did not change the fact 
of the things but it how things are put. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MS GIGABA:   It is ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  That is fine.  I think 
Mr Myburgh is saying, because he is aware that you did 
raise 
issues 
with 
this 
paragraph 
and 
he 
thinks 
the 
supplementary affidavit that corrects this might affect 
certain other paragraphs that follow, should rather not - he 
would rather not take you through them. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because he is aware of that. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what he wanted – he was trying 
20 
to convey. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  Then, Ms Gigaba, at 
page 106 there is a heading:  Prior Knowledge of 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 303 of 416 
 
Appointments in State-owned Enterprises.  Now you deal at 
paragraph 31.1 with The New Age Breakfast and that 
Mr Gigaba then informed you of something after one of 
those breakfasts.  What did he tell you? 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please repeat the question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 31.1. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say after one of The New Age 
Breakfasts, Mr Gigaba then told you something.  What did 
he tell you? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   About the TNA Breakfast? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   The only thing I know at TNA they used to 
discussed who sits on which table.  Ja, that is what I know 
about them. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  So the heading to this section 
is 
Prior 
Knowledge 
of 
Appointments 
of 
State-owned 
Enterprises.  Was there a time when Mr Gigaba would tell 
you:  Well, mister so and so is going to move here and 
then that would happen?  That is what this section deals 
20 
with. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Were there occasions where he said 
X is going to happen and then it did happen? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 304 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you remember those instances?  
To whom was he talking about? 
MS GIGABA:   I remember when he said Brian Dames will 
leave at Eskom and then Brian Molefe will go to Eskom.  
So I knew that it would happen and it happened.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And so he said to you that Brian 
Molefe would go to Eskom? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And I think you have mentioned 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MS GIGABA:   I think even Gama also.  I knew before he 
even – ja.  I mean, before ...[indistinct] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So he told you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Maybe let us take one at a time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is clear.  Let us talk about 
Mr Brian Molefe.  You say that after one of The New Age 
Breakfasts sessions, Mr Gigaba told you that Mr Brian 
Molefe was going to be moved from Transnet to Eskom 
Holdings Stock Limited.  And you say he told you this 
20 
before Mr Molefe was officially appointed to Eskom? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He told you that the Guptas wanted 
Mr Molefe at Eskom and not Mr Brian Dames.  Is that 
correct? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 305 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  You did not put a date here.  Do 
you have some recollection of which year it may have 
been? 
MS GIGABA:   No, I do not remember.  What I know.  He 
was the Minister of DPE at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was Minister at DPE at that time? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   And it was during the time where they used 
10 
to host a lot of TNA Breakfasts meetings on SABC 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just repeat that, please? 
MS GIGABA:   I am saying it was around the time they 
used to host a lot of TNA meetings at SABC 2 on – in live 
in the morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Now Ms Lynne Brown was 
giving evidence last week and she said she was appointed 
as Minister of Public Enterprises at some stage in 2014.  
So I think it would have been after the General Elections of 
2014.  So if you say that Mr Gigaba told you this while he 
20 
was still Minister of Public Enterprises, it would mean that 
he told you this either at some stage during the first half of 
2014 or earlier. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you say that? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 306 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Is there a chance that you 
might be mistaken about that? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not remember exactly which time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but he was still Minister of Public 
Enterprises, you say? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  So that deals with 
Mr Molefe.  Did Mr Gigaba ever mention anything to you 
10 
about Mr Gama? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I remember. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did he tell you? 
MS GIGABA:   I think it was – there was a time he was – 
he had a position at Eskom – not at Eskom, sorry about 
that.  At Transnet.  And then he left but when he was 
appointed again.  So I do not which sector he was moving 
from, to another sector, then he told me that Gama will be 
appointed as a CEO. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Be appointed as the CEO? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not hear the earlier part, the first 
part of what you were saying.  Were you saying that you 
are not sure when ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Because what I know. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 307 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS GIGABA:   Siyabonga was already at Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   So he was - when he was appointed as the 
CEO, he was not arriving as a new person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not coming from outside? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, because I remember that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Siyabonga Gama was CEO of a 
10 
division of Transnet at some stage, TFR.  And he was 
dismissed in 2010.  Ja, I think June 2010 and he was 
reinstated in February – or the settlement agreement was 
in February 2011.  He started or resumed duties in that 
position as CEO of TFR, namely, a division of Transnet, I 
think in April 2011.  And then later on when Mr Brian 
Molefe was seconded to Eskom in 2015, April, Mr Gama 
was acting CEO of Transnet. 
MS GIGABA:   Of Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then, I think later on he was 
20 
appointed.  So that ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I only remember that last part of him 
because I was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The last part. 
MS GIGABA:   ....because I was from with him in 2011 and 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 308 of 416 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So you heard that he was 
going to be appointed as Chief Executive Officer of 
Transnet ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...in 2015? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you are not sure when it was? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, it was – because during the time, Malusi 
was ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was he still Minister ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   He was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...at that ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   He was the DPE. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
He 
was 
still 
Minister 
of 
Public 
Enterprises? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he told you about Mr Gama 
...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...being in line to be appointed as CEO 
of Transnet? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And you do not think you are 
mistaken about the fact that he was ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 309 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   I am not sure about the year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the time? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not sure whether he was still at 
DPE at that time, that is Mr Gigaba, when he told you?  
Could it be that he was no longer Minister of DPE at the 
time? 
MS GIGABA:   He was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS GIGABA:   Because we went in Cape Town.  So I do 
not – sometimes he needed to attended Eskom functions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   But Gama was not there but Brian Molefe 
was there.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   So and I remember Malusi was still the 
Minister of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Public Enterprises. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   But in this - I do not remember exactly 
about the years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 310 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   And I said that to the Commission that I am 
not sure about the years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Because I was not keeping track of 
everything that he was doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You see, Ms Gigaba, perhaps to be 
of some assistance to you.  This is another issue that we 
looked at during our consultation.  Because as the 
Chairperson has pointed out to you.  In 2011, Mr Gama was 
10 
reinstated as the Chief Executive of Transnet Freight Rail 
and that was at a time when Mr Gigaba was the DPE 
Minister.  He was then in 2015 made the Group Chief 
Executive of Transnet by which time Mr Gigaba was no 
longer the DPE Minister.  And as I recall, you talked about 
being put back into a position.  Do you remember that? 
MS GIGABA:   Because - what happened is.  Let us say 
...[indistinct].  I do not put times on certain issues.  What I 
wanted to highlight is, like, every time when something 
happens, he will say before.  So he will come and say it.  
20 
And when I or giving my consultation, I said I do not want 
to put exact times with what he was talking about.   
 
What I wanted to highlight is, like, each and all 
those times when they were appointed we knew before 
because he will tell me about it maybe two or three months 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 311 of 416 
 
before that so and so will go to this one or this one will 
move.  Some he will be sad about it.  Some because there 
is nothing you can do.  So it was those kind of subjects.   
 
So I knew that Mr Gama will be brought back to 
the position.  He was just like I do not know him.  [Speaker 
not clear]  But I knew also about – also Brian, that Brian 
will move to Eskom before he was appointed to Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you have made a distinction 
...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...between being told that Mr Gama was 
going to be made or appointed as CEO of TFR, a division 
of Transnet?  Or being told that he was going to be 
appointed as CEO of Transnet?  In your mind would you 
have been able to make that distinction? 
MS GIGABA:   I think maybe the mistake is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Because I do not remember exactly what he 
was – what position he was holding.  But I know that – at 
some point when Malusi was at DPE, Siyabonga was in a 
20 
position that he was appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS GIGABA:   And he  – because he said that at home(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Mr Myburgh. 
MS GIGABA:   Then I said – what I do not know because I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 312 of 416 
 
was not keeping tracks of their movements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   Because I was not tracking this one is doing 
this and this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS GIGABA:   But I knew that at some point.  Because if I 
remember correctly, when Siyabonga was appointed in that 
position, there was like a little(?) bit of a noise.  I think it 
was in the media about him moving and he needs to come 
back. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS GIGABA:   So and then Siyabonga, Mahlangu and 
Malusi they had some discussion at home, talking about it 
that Siyabonga must come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you talk about Mr Gama coming 
back or something like this ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...appointment. 
MS GIGABA:   Because I do not know his position properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Because I have never done that research. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You see, he was dismissed in – at 
the end of June 2010 from his position as CEO of TFR, not 
of Transnet. 
MS GIGABA:   That is ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 313 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then he ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   ...what I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...he was fighting his dismissal. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then there were negotiations for a 
settlement.  The negotiations happened when Mr Gigaba 
was ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   ...was still DPE. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the Minister of Public Enterprises. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I remember that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And as a result of those negotiations, a 
settlement agreement was reached in terms of which he 
was allowed back. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was reinstated. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he was not ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   That is what I am talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he was reinstated, he was going 
back to his earlier position ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...of CEO of TFR. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, that is what I was talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not being made CEO of 
Transnet. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 314 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, that is what I was talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were talking about the first one? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS GIGABA:   Because that time I remember Malusi was at 
DPE. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  But did you say they held 
a meeting in – at your home, Mr Gigaba, Mr Mahlangu and 
Mr Gama at some stage? 
MS GIGABA:   No.  Gama has never been at my home. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS GIGABA:   But we – we are like – they were like friends 
of some sorts because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
MS GIGABA:   ...Athol called.  We attended the wedding. I 
think it was his daughter ’s wedding.  And also, they were 
close. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The three of them? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, they were close. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   So as I remember, Malusi would talk – will 
have that kind of discussion with Siyabonga, Mahlangu.  
He would discuss how they need to assist Siyabonga Gama 
to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 315 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Because there was some business(?) still 
that happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS GIGABA:   So I remember that.  Those discussions.  It 
is just like I was not part of them but I remember them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But were those discussions, were they 
taking place in your presence or you were hearing from 
Mr Gigaba that such discussions had taken place? 
MS GIGABA:   It was him and Msomi, Thami.  Thami 
Msomi.  They were talking.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, but Gama was not in the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not in the meeting? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They are talking on the phone? 
MS GIGABA:   No, it was a meeting.  It was Thami Msomi 
and Malusi, they were talking about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS GIGABA:   And then later, Malusi was telling me 
because I think he did not like how Siyabonga Gama was 
20 
dismissed.  I think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  At paragraph 31.3, you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 316 of 416 
 
also say something about Mr Gama. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you deal with that, please? 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So was there – how – do you know 
how Gugu Gigaba came to be employed at Transnet? 
MS GIGABA:   I have a little knowledge about it.  What I 
know is, when Gogotso(?) Malusi at SAPI(?), they want him 
to take the package because he was very sick and then 
Malusi was like:  No, you must take the package and move 
10 
to Joburg.  He also, through Siyabonga, to find him a 
position there.   So then he came – he stayed with us, I 
think, for two months.  Then after that he went to work at 
Transnet.  [Speaker not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Just repeat that answer.  I 
have missed some things.   
MS GIGABA:   Okay.  So what I know.  Gugu was working 
in KZN at SAPI. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS GIGABA:   But just because he was often very sick at 
20 
work.  So SAPI offered her(?) the boarding package.  So 
Malusi said no she must take it and she must move to 
Joburg to stay with us.  So which she came to stay with us.  
And he explained to me that his sister has come to stay 
with us but he will speak to Siyabonga Gama to find her a 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 317 of 416 
 
job at Transnet.  Then once he finds a job, he(?) will leave 
our home and find his(?) place to stay and that happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Then Ms Gigaba, there 
is a heading, Tensions Rising.  Do you see that? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now whilst Mr Gigaba was the 
Minister of the DPE, was there a time when you felt that 
the Guptas were putting pressure on him or did he mention 
that to you? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   He mentioned that to me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did he say? 
MS GIGABA:   There were times where Malusi will have his 
own diary from his department and then while he is sitting 
at home maybe he will say Ajay is calling him.  He needs to 
go.  Or he will have to leave the department.  So he will 
come at home.  He was like:  No, let us go to Saxon.  They 
want to see me.  But it came to a time where he did not 
want to do it.  He says they put pressure on him because 
he has his own diary that he runs it with his PA.   
20 
 
So now when they do these random calls.  So 
now he needs to cancel the things and then he had to rush 
to Saxon.  So he was not happy with that.  And also I 
remember.  He was really not happy with when there were 
a lot of arguments and pressure on ...[indistinct] to use 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 318 of 416 
 
SAA because Malusi thought he was good as the CEO. 
 
And also, I remember that he liked Mr Dames at 
Eskom.  He said he was a good guy.  He was working.  So 
but the Guptas did not like them.  So there were a lot of 
discussions about them.  So sometimes he would not take 
their calls when they were calling and I was like:  No, why 
are you not taking their calls?  He was like:  They always 
put pressure on me.  They want me to run my work the way 
they want.  And now I want to run the department the way I 
want.   
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So was there a time where you 
discussed this with Mr Gigaba, the pressure that you say 
was being put on him? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, a lot of times because it will – most of 
the calls they will make him uncomfortable.  It is either 
when maybe he talks to Dudu Myeni.  Maybe they are 
discussing SAA and then after that he will talk to me and 
say he is not okay because I think it was more of he 
wanted me to give him support.  And also, there are certain 
people that he – he really enjoyed to work with them.  And 
20 
then he felt the Guptas, they also want to change things 
around and he was comfortable with those people.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So was there ever a time in that 
context in that you suggested to Mr Gigaba that he might 
stop using these advices? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 319 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please repeat that? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did you – you say in the middle of 
paragraph 32:   
“When I asked Mr Gigaba why he did not stop 
using the Guptas as his advisors...” 
 
What did he tell you then? 
MS GIGABA:   Oh, I asked him that because I felt like – 
because these people are stressing him.  So why do you 
not just cut communication with them?  So he said he 
cannot.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what did you say in response? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot remember.  
MS GIGABA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Was there a time – have a look at 
paragraph 33 – when the relationship between Mr Gigaba 
and the Guptas appeared to be strained? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when was that?  Can you 
20 
remember? 
MS GIGABA:   Firstly, I noticed every time when they will 
talk about ...[indistinct].  Malusi, he did not like those.  And 
also 
I 
remember 
when 
they 
were 
talking 
about 
...[indistinct].  He really did not like ...[indistinct] to be 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 320 of 416 
 
removed.  And I remember at the time it was more when 
they talk about – because he has called Dudu Myeni – in 
the beginning they used to be very friendly and later when 
he was at the DPE they used to argue a lot about the board 
and the decisions of the board and also how SAA is 
operating.   
 
So Malusi was very uncomfortable how – I think 
she – he felt that Dudu was just in everything.  He wanted 
to be hands on where he is not supposed to be hands on.  
So it was more of that most of the time.   
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now did Mr Gigaba often receive 
calls from Mr Ajay Gupta? 
MS 
GIGABA: 
 
 
Ja, 
sometimes 
Ajay 
will 
call 
him.  
Sometimes he will take the calls, sometimes he will not 
take his calls.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And why – what would cause him not 
to take the calls? 
MS GIGABA:   I think it was at the later stage where these 
calls because knew that he will tell him something that is 
going to upset him or he will tell him something about a 
20 
certain individual that needs to  be moved, because every 
time when there is someone, AJ wants him to be appointed, 
he would just put pressure on him and Malusi would hate 
that.  
 
So and at some point, sometimes he would, then he 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 321 of 416 
 
would [indistinct] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what would happen if he ignored 
the Guptas calls? 
MS GIGABA:  I only remember one instance where AJ said 
Malusi must remember why he was appointed as a minister.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What did Mr AJ Gupta say? 
MS GIGABA:  He said he needs to remember why he was 
appointed as a minister.   
CHAIRPERSON:  As a Minister of Public Enterprises? 
MS GIGABA:  Public enterprises.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he say this in your presence or did 
you get, did you hear from Mr Gigaba that that is what 
...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  Malusi told me.  
CHAIRPERSON:  He told you? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes, but I was there when he was talking to 
him on the phone.  But also he told me.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you.  I just want to take 
you through paragraph 33.  Tell me if there is parts of it 
20 
that are wrong.  It says: 
 
“During early 2014 Mr Gigaba’s relationship 
with the Guptas began to appear strain.  The 
Guptas wanted Mr Gigaba to get rid of Mr 
Danus as the chief executive officer of Eskom, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 322 of 416 
 
because Mr Danus was not doing what the 
Guptas wanted him to do for them at Eskom.  
However, Mr Gigaba did not agree with the 
Guptas instruction.  Mr Gigaba then started 
avoiding telephone calls from the Guptas.  
When Mr Gigaba ignored the phone calls, the 
Guptas would send Mr Mosane to speak to him 
and Mr Gigaba would then agree to meet with 
them.  Mr AJ Gupta would regularly call Mr 
Gigaba and demand that he attend the Gupta 
10 
residence to meet certain people.  This upset 
Mr Gigaba, because he would have to cancel 
his planned official appointments in order to 
do so.  Mr Gigaba also told me that AJ Gupta 
told him that if he wanted to run the DPE as he 
wished, he would be moved back to the 
Department of Home Affairs.  I understand that 
Mr AJ Gupta would often tell Mr Gigaba that he 
should remember why he was appointed at the 
DPE.” 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is that correct or is there something 
wrong with this paragraph?  Is there anything wrong with 
it? 
MS GIGABA:  There is nothing wrong.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 323 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Then you go on to deal with 
Mr Gigaba’s relationship with Dudu Myeni.  Now was there 
a time where Mr Gigaba had a close working relationship 
with Ms Myeni? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When was that? 
MS GIGABA:  I think when he was appointed in the 
beginning at DPE, they were close.  They were like a sister 
and a brother.  Although they were colleagues as well.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Paragraph 34 goes on to read that 
10 
Ms Myeni facilitated our honeymoon trip to Mauritius.  
What do you mean by that? 
MS GIGABA:  Well, let me say a honeymoon, because it 
was not the exact honeymoon, and I raised that on the 
consultation. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  So this was a trip to Mauritius if 
I understand correctly what you say.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That you took shortly before you got 
married. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And when you say Ms Myeni 
facilitated the trip, what do you mean by that? 
MS GIGABA:  So he arranged the whole trip for us.  They 
booked for us to go to Mauritius.  We went to meet him, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 324 of 416 
 
meet her at the Sheraton Hotel.  Then she sent us the 
whole itinerary about travelling and I remember when we 
were in Mauritius we were stuck, because I think [indistinct  
was not so familiar with travelling by himself.  
 
So when we were there we did not know where to 
pick up the car, what happened.  So we were calling her 
when we were there because she is the one who arranged 
the trip.  So he did that because he said he wanted him to 
go to rest, because while we were arranging my wedding, 
Malusi was not part of the wedding arrangements because 
10 
he was working, and if I remember properly, that time 
Malusi was the head of elections.  
 
So he was forever out with the door to door, doing 
the preparations of the elections and also give us the time 
we were preparing for our wedding.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So who paid for this trip to Mauritius? 
MS GIGABA:  Dudu paid for it.  Malusi told me that he paid 
for it, but what I remember she is the one who gave us the 
whole artillery, our flights and when we get there, where 
we must sleep.  Who must we call, who needs to pick us up 
20 
at the airport and everything.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now can you remember where Mr 
Gigaba would meet, typically meet with Ms Myeni? 
MS GIGABA:  At Sheraton Hotel in Pretoria.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 325 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  But sometimes she would come at home.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:  There was sometimes she would come at our 
home.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  She would come to your home? 
MS GIGABA:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And was there a time then where 
their relationship soured? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  How did that come about, why?   
10 
MS GIGABA:  They used to, because they started and they 
had a sisterly and a brotherly relationship and also as 
colleagues, but then it became sour when Dudu used to tell 
Malusi that you need to do a certain thing, and Malusi will 
be like he does not want Dudu to tell her the kind of job 
that he needs to do.  
 
Also I remember on the Monalusi and Galawaya 
saga, Dudu did not like Monalusi and Malusi did and also 
Malusi was not happy when Dudu was interfering with the 
board decisions.  So he will call her and say like why she 
20 
is always involved in things.  
 
I remember they will have like a lot of arguments.  
Then Dudu will be like Malusi will go back to, he will be 
taken back to Home Affairs and Malusi is like no one will 
take me back to Home Affairs.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 326 of 416 
 
 
So they will just fight about that and Malusi or 
sometimes he will come and say the president said you 
need to do this, and then Malusi was like president, if you 
want to tell me something, he will come to me.  He must 
not go to you and tell me something.  
 
So they had that kind of a relationship where it 
became, they did not want to meet, because I remember 
there was a certain time where Malusi did not want to talk 
to her anymore, but it was more of how she runs SAA.  
Malusi felt like he was not supposed to be appointed as the 
10 
Chairperson of SAA.  
 
He felt like he did not know how to do the job.  
Sometimes he interferes.  So they had that kind of a 
strained relationship.  But in the beginning they were very 
close.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now you say at paragraph 37, let me 
ask you did Mr Gigaba ever mention anything to you about 
the SAA Johannesburg Mumbai flight route? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was that an issue that was causing 
20 
concern? 
MS GIGABA:  It was their topic, because I think Malusi 
was not interested in this thing of Mumbai route, SAA has 
to be cancelled, but it was a business thing and then he 
would say they will discuss it with Malusi and every time 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 327 of 416 
 
they talk about that, Malusi will be very angry like why he 
is telling her what to do.  
 
Why she is interfering because sometimes he would 
just switch off the phone and he will tell me like I do not 
know why she was just appointed.  So every time Malusi 
used to question why he was holding the position of the 
new 
Chairperson 
because 
he 
felt 
like 
he 
was 
just 
interfering everywhere.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson, I have a request that we 
take a short comfort break.  I see that it has just gone nine 
10 
o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you have been standing the whole 
day.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  How are you feeling? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  No, I am fine.  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are fine? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, I am keen I am sure like 
everyone to finish this evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms Gigaba, can we continue after 
20 
a break and try and finish? 
MR SOLOMON:  Okay.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  We will take a ten minutes 
adjournment.   
We adjourn. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 328 of 416 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Ms Gigaba, 
can I ask you to have a look at paragraph 37 at the bottom 
of page 1007.  You say that on Sundays Mr Gigaba and I 
would regularly have lunch in Sandton.  Is that correct?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just switch on your mic please and then 
repeat the answer.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You say at paragraph 37: 
10 
 
“On Sundays Mr Gigaba and I would regularly 
have lunch in Sandton.” 
 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:  That is 37 point what? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  37. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The previous page.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry, page 1007. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the bottom. 
MS GIGABA:  Oh, okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:  At the bottom. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So paragraph 37 is at the bottom.  
Are you there? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  “So on Sundays Mr Gigaba and I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 329 of 416 
 
would regularly have lunch in Sandton.  While 
driving to return home I would overhear Mr 
Gigaba’s telephone discussions with Ms Myeni.  
He would sometimes share the detail of these 
discussions with me and that would include.” 
 
What does the, if you go over the page, what was 
the sorts of things that he would tell you after holding 
these discussions with Ms Myeni? 
MS GIGABA:  That is what I already mentioned before.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  It is what I have already mentioned before.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay, and that is about following 
instructions, etcetera.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was there a time where he said to 
you that he did not understand why she had been 
appointed as the Chair of SAA because he did not believe 
she was competent? 
MS GIGABA:  He said that to me, not to her.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, and did he say to you that she 
20 
would feed information to the former president? 
MS GIGABA:  Can you please ask the question again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he say to you that Ms Myeni 
would feed information to the former president without 
telling him about that? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 330 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  Malusi felt like that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He felt that? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then paragraph 37.3, and these 
are things I think that you have already touched on: 
 
“When Mr Gigaba did not want to follow the 
instructions of Mr AJ Gupta of Ms Myeni, one 
or other would phone the former president to 
complain about him.” 
 
Is that right? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  “Ms Myeni would then pass on 
instructions from President Zuma to Mr Gigaba 
which would upset him.  Mr Gigaba believed 
that 
he 
should 
have 
a 
direct 
line 
of 
communication to the former president and not 
receive instructions via Ms Myeni, because he 
did not report to her.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then at 38, can you deal with 
that please?   
MS GIGABA:  What do you want me to do about 38? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What did Ms Myeni tell Mr Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:  He said if he does not want to do something, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 331 of 416 
 
he will be taken back to Home Affairs.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And was there a time when Mr 
Gigaba did return to the Department of Home Affairs? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You said earlier on that Mr AJ Gupta told 
you, told Mr Gigaba ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  That ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  The same thing that you just said.  
CHAIRPERSON:  He would be returned to Home Affairs.  
10 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So now I see that you are saying that Ms 
Myeni also said that same thing.  
MS GIGABA:  They both said it, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you sure that both of them said the 
same thing? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes, I am sure.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Mr Myburgh?   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you.  Then you have a 
heading, Mr Gigaba’s return to the Department of Home 
20 
Affairs and paragraph 39: 
 
“On 26 May Mr Gigaba was transferred back to 
the Department of Home Affairs as minister.” 
 
I take it that that was not a date that you could 
personally recall, but you were assisted with that date.  Is 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 332 of 416 
 
that correct? 
MS GIGABA:  I did not assist with the dates, I think the 
commission put the dates.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
MS GIGABA:  But I said Malusi was taken back.  I 
remember when he was taken back.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Because that date accords with the 
date in the schedule, in paragraph 6.  All the different 
positions that he held.  
MS GIGABA:  Remember, all those dates are the dates 
10 
they were not put by me.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes.  
MS GIGABA:  They were put by the commission. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is actually Ms Gigaba what I am 
saying here, is that this is, you did not remember this date, 
you were assisted with the date. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct.  But you do remember him 
being transferred back to the Department of Home Affairs.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes, I do. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But I am not sure that is the right 
language perhaps, but he moved.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes, he moved back. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did Mr Gigaba think that he would be 
moved back? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 333 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  No. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why? 
MS GIGABA:  Because he had a very close relationship 
with the president.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what was Mr Gigaba’s reaction to 
being returned or to moving back as you put it, to the 
Department of Home Affairs?  How did he feel about it? 
MS GIGABA:  He was shocked and also I think he was 
hurt.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he tell you what had happened? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  In terms of? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he tell you what the president 
told him? 
MS GIGABA:  He said he told him that he will be taken 
back to, you need to go back to Home Affairs.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And did he tell you why the president 
had said that he was going to be moved back?   
MS GIGABA:  He said he need to tighten the boarders at 
the Home Affairs.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what did Mr Gigaba think of that 
reason, or think of that?  Do you know what his reaction 
was to being told that he needed to go back to Home 
Affairs in order to strengthen border controls? 
MS GIGABA:  He thought he was taken back because he 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 334 of 416 
 
was already threatened that he will be taken back.  So he 
thought [indistinct but the president did not say those 
words.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  You then go on to deal 
with the Gupta’s application for South African citizenship.  
What did Mr Gigaba tell you about this? 
MS GIGABA:  I am not supposed to talk about this, 
because I never work at the department.  So what I will say 
is [indistinct].  So I am not comfortable with ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry, for some reason I am not 
hearing you clearly.  What did you say? 
MS GIGABA:  I am saying I am not comfortable to talk 
about the application citizenship of the Guptas, because I 
have never worked for the department.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, but what did Mr Gigaba tell you? 
MS GIGABA:  So maybe you will ask something, then he 
will respond to that because most of everything I have said 
here, is the questions that ... the questions that I was 
asked on the consultation.  Then I will respond to what I 
20 
know.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  
MS GIGABA:  Based on the questions [indistinct]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So is this a part of the affidavit that 
you want to correct? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 335 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  Ja, because I do not want to say certain 
things because they are here and I do not want to say 
those words because I do not want to be accountable for a 
certain yes, because most of the information that is 
pertained, the commission summarised.  Maybe it is their 
own interpretation and I do not want to be part of that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Okay, well when it says at 42 that 
during Mr Gigaba’s turn of office as Minister of the 
Department of Home Affairs, he informed me that he was 
assisting some of the Gupta family members to obtain 
10 
citizenship in South Africa.  
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Chairperson, through you.  The 
witness is making it very clear that she does not intend to 
deal with the contents of paragraph 42, 43 and 44.  She 
says she does not intend to do so, because one the 
information there was provided to her by the commission. 
 
Secondly because she does not have personal 
knowledge of these facts.  Now referring her to this 
information for her to confirm, does not take cognisance of 
the fact that she is saying I am not comfortable, that 
20 
information is not within my personal knowledge.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  The witness is not being asked 
to say anything she does not know.  She is being asked 
whether that sentence is true or not and therefore she is 
able to say no, it is not true or it has been put in a way 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 336 of 416 
 
that I am not comfortable with or anything like that.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes, that is what I meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Chair I apologise.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Once again, the witness is saying I 
do not know this information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  It was put by the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  The witness has deposed to 
10 
an affidavit and she then says there is something in the 
affidavit that she is unhappy about.  The evidence leader is 
entitled to say is it the first sentence that you are unhappy 
about.  
 
Is there anything untrue about it.  He is entitled to 
ask that and the witness is quite entitled to say yes, it is 
not true or yes, it is true.   
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Chairperson, my objection was 
merely 
because 
the 
witness 
specifically 
said 
this 
information was put here by the commission and therefore I 
20 
do not have knowledge of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I think Mr Myburgh wants to 
establish which part of this paragraph the witness says was 
put 
by 
the 
commission, 
because 
that 
is 
a 
serious 
allegation. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 337 of 416 
 
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  As the Chair pleases.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, those are serious allegations.  So it 
is important that if there is something that she never told 
the commission which has been put here, let us have 
clarity.  If she says, as I believe she did with regard to 
some earlier paragraph where she says the substance 
might be fine but the way it has been put is not right, it is 
important that we know exactly what it is.   
 
So Ms Gigaba, when Mr Myburgh ask questions 
about this paragraph, feel free to say what you wish to say.  
10 
If you want to say this is not true or it has not been put in 
the right way, feel free to say so.  If you say it is true, but 
the way it is put or whatever, feel free. 
 
But if you say that the investigators or members of 
the legal team of the commission have put information in 
your affidavit without having been told that by you, it is 
important that we know.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay.  So what I said to him, I am not 
comfortable to answer this part because there is a year 
that is mentioned, which I never I do not talk about years, 
20 
because I never kept the years recording everything what 
happened.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS GIGABA:  And also even the summary at the end.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You can take it, Ms Gigaba you can take 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 338 of 416 
 
it that if you have a problem about a year or a date, as far 
as I am concerned that is not going to be a big deal you 
know, but it is more about whether the substance does not 
reflect what you told whoever prepared the affidavit.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay, because what makes me comfortable 
is if I said something, because part of the paragraph, there 
is something that I say.  But now the way that it is 
summarised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  
MS GIGABA:  It has so much of the information that has 
10 
got nothing to do with me.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS GIGABA:  Especially 44.  It is something that was 
collected by the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
MS GIGABA:  And it makes it difficult for me to be held 
accountable for the whole paragraph and to select certain 
parts.  So I wish they have put my words ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think I understand completely what 
you are saying.  Mr Myburgh? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, perhaps we could ask you in 
your own words what happened in relation to the Guptas 
application for South African citizenship, that you know.  
That you learnt from Mr Gigaba.  
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words even if you did not look at 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 339 of 416 
 
this affidavit, at these paragraphs, in terms of what he told 
you if you were to just relate that.  
MS GIGABA:  I will not remember a long part of it, that he 
said he was assisting them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS GIGABA:  But I just want to express myself on the 
publically [indistinct] because I do not want to go in terms 
of what happens in the department because I have never 
worked for the department.  So I do not want to use a 
certain word and then when the department comes back he 
10 
says no we never done that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS GIGABA:  Because I have never worked for the 
Department of Home Affairs.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS GIGABA:  And here it is already, the answer is broad.  
This whole information it is not my words.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So if I understand you correctly, 
please correct me if I am wrong.  You have a particular 
concern with paragraph 44.  Because there it says: 
20 
 
“It is publically known that Mr Gigaba during 
his term of the Minister of the Department of 
Home 
Affairs 
had 
approved 
the 
early 
naturalisation of members of the Gupta family.” 
 
That you say ...[intervenes]  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 340 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  It is you that commissioner to that, not me.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So you say ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  I never done any investigation about what 
public says about him.  Everything that is given here it is 
what I heard from him, it is what I have seen, but I did not 
go do an investigation when happened when and how the 
public views him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS GIGABA:  And that what Malusi was challenging on his 
10 
affidavit.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But if you take out that and we take 
out the date in 2015 you have any particular concerns in 
relation 
to 
paragraph 
42 
and 
43, 
because 
it 
refers 
...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  We were, but what I am interested in 
is your own personal experience.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Of what he told you. 
20 
MS GIGABA:  Ja, but you are making my life so difficult, 
because I so wish you did not mix my words because now I 
have to select what is my words out of that whole 
paragraph, because all this it is what you know of him.  It 
is the investigation that you have done.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 341 of 416 
 
 
It is what the public think of him and then now I 
have to find myself in between and that is the reason I said 
I do not want to come to the commission before everything 
is corrected because now I have to tick pieces and pieces 
of what I said.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you be happy to through your legal 
representatives, put in an affidavit ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  How you wanted it to be put? 
MS GIGABA:  That is what yes, we propose.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So you can still deal with it but you 
would like to put it in your ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  In my own words. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS GIGABA:  So that I can say what I have seen and what 
I know.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS GIGABA:  Because I do not want to agree with the 
statement that has got nothing to do with me.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Well, Mr Myburgh I do not know 
20 
what you think but it may well be that when we see that 
affidavit, it may well be that whatever you might wish to 
pursue, you might look ... do that after looking at that.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, I think we are happy to move on, 
on that basis.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 342 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson.  So this is one of those 
areas that, like with the India trip you need to re-craft the 
passage.  Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:  That is the thing that I did not want to do, 
and I do not want you to force me to do it, because when 
you force me to do it now, I have to look and try to select.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  
MS GIGABA:  And I did not want to do that.  I preferred, 
that 
is 
what 
I 
propose 
to 
my 
lawyers 
and 
to 
the 
10 
commission.  I preferred to stick to my words, so that I can 
give the information what I know.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS GIGABA:  Because now it is to select the bits and 
pieces ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  That is difficult because some here, on 43 I 
know what I have said.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
MS GIGABA:  And now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no ...[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:  And now it is mixed with the whole overall of 
the investigation of the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not worry, that is fine because you 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 343 of 416 
 
want to put it in your own words.  
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  That that is acceptable.  You could do 
that in a supplementary affidavit.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then once the commission has got 
that we can look at that and take it from there.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.   
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Chairperson, if I may? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  I do need to indicate that my original 
concern was that as Ms Gigaba is being led on aspects of 
this affidavit, at a later stage she then furnishes an 
affidavit to try and explain this I did not say, this I did not 
say. 
 
The reason why this has been a concern is purely 
because at some point or the other, when we come to deal 
and I am just giving a simple example.  When we come to 
deal with paragraph 45 or 43 of this original affidavit, the 
20 
question then becomes you agreed to certain aspects of it 
and now you are now refusing.  
 
Hence the concern Chairperson was that we try and 
we make the exercise simple for the commission.  Not only 
for 
the 
credibility 
and 
making 
sure 
that 
the 
proper 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 344 of 416 
 
information before this commission is exactly that which 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no, no.  It is fine the way it is.  
What has been said, is he has said that some of the things 
that are here she knows, but others have been put in a 
certain way.  She did say Mr Gigaba did say he was 
assisting, I think the Guptas about the citizenship. 
 
But as far as I am concerned, the arrangement is a 
supplementary affidavit will be obtained where under the 
Guptas application for South African citizenship they can 
10 
put her evidence they say she wants to put in terms of 
what she knows, and in terms of what she was told by Mr 
Gigaba.   
 
Then we will have that.  What happens after that 
will depend on what emerges because if her supplementary 
affidavit says what is wrong is the 2015 and the 44, and 
then the way this thing is put has lost the essence of what 
I told whoever was drafting the affidavit.  
 
This is what I said, it is fine, but I do not think there 
is any other way of doing it, because this is an affidavit 
20 
which she signed.  
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  Chairperson, as I had already 
submitted before, we raised concerns and Chairperson, 
one of the reasons why she feels it is critical that she 
explains the circumstances under which she signs this 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 345 of 416 
 
affidavit, we saw that this affidavit does not get placed on 
her.  Because she is specifically saying the contents of this 
affidavit contain information that is not mine.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I have heard that.  I have heard 
that, I have heard that.  It is enough.  I know what, I know 
all the points you have made.  I have not forgotten them.  
We are going to proceed, but we proceed on the basis that 
one, 
as 
far 
as 
these 
paragraphs 
are 
concerned 
a 
supplementary affidavit will be provided in which she will 
put her knowledge or her evidence the way she wants to 
10 
put it.  
 
If 
in 
subsequent 
paragraphs 
there 
is 
another 
paragraph where she has a similar discomfort we will talk 
about that and probably do the same thing.  But let us 
make progress.  It is late in the night, we all want to finish, 
okay. 
ADV OLDWAGE SC:  As the Chair pleases.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.   
MS GIGABA:  Also can I say something on that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
MS GIGABA:  When it comes to the signing of the affidavit,  
because I remember on our last consultation one of the 
evidence leaders were saying but you signed it.  So when 
it came to this, and me signing it, it was a day because 
during those days when we were about to wrap up this, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 346 of 416 
 
there were a lot of threats, people threatening me about 
coming here and I was receiving a lot of calls.  
 
I felt like my life was so threatened.  So it was more 
of the security concern, so on that day we were signing 
this, it was the day we received the news that there was 
someone, they tried to kill someone or something.  So 
when Paul gave the affidavit to my senior counsel, so then 
he was like we only have ten minutes.  
 
We need to sign it quickly.  I do not want it on me 
because these people, what if these people they you know, 
10 
because we were so scared to have the affidavit within us, 
because the media was calling me, wanted the affidavit.  
Certain people, they wanted the affidavit from me and I did 
not have it.  
 
So when I was answering people, telling them 
especially the media to say I do not have the affidavit and I 
was not lying.  I did not have my affidavit with me, and that 
is what we proposed with the evidence leader.  That I do 
not want to have it, because I felt like having this affidavit 
will put my life more in danger, because a lot of people 
20 
wanted my affidavit and my life was so under threat during 
the time.  
 
So when on the day we were signing it, we were 
only given certain few minutes.  So we sign it quickly and 
then the senior counsel went to drop it off to the evidence 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 347 of 416 
 
leader, but it was the nature of both of us we were so 
scared of our lives.  
 
Myself, I was scared of my life and I raised that and 
we were discussing the security, the threat.  How I am 
going to be protected which I was not protected by the 
commission and it promised to protect me.  So every time 
when now they are saying I signed it, I did not sign it in my 
comfort. 
 
I sign it under pressure.  We did not go through it 
because of there was that on that day.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not worry about that for now.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your supplementary affidavit you can 
explain the circumstances under which you signed it, 
because when you prepare your supplementary affidavit, 
when you ... it is looked at, it may well be that in 
substance you will not be deviating much from what you 
have said.  
 
But one can only make that judgment call when one 
compares the two, but when you do your supplementary 
20 
affidavit 
you 
can 
just 
explain 
that 
these 
are 
the 
circumstances under which you signed this first one.  
MS GIGABA:  Okay.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright, let us continue.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Thank you.  Ms Gigaba, 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 348 of 416 
 
there is another heading then, Malusi Gigaba’s transfer 
from the Department of Home Affairs to the Department of 
Finance.  You remember that he moved from Home Affairs 
to the department of finance? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Remember that, and how did you 
come to learn about that? 
MS GIGABA:  Because he told me.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And can you remember where you 
were at the time when he told you? 
10 
MS GIGABA:  We were in Cape Town.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And were you at a function or 
something? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what happened when, did he 
receive a telephone call? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  After he received the call, what did 
he say to you? 
MS GIGABA:  He told me that [indistinct]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please speak closer to the mic.  
MS GIGABA:  So he told me about his appointment as the 
Minister of Finance.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was he happy about that?   
MS GIGABA:  He was not.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 349 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Why? 
MS GIGABA:  What he mentioned, he said he knows that 
he was not the person which, for him to be a Minister of 
Finance.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:  He said he knew that he was not the person 
which to be, for him to be a Minister of Finance.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  He is not the person the president 
wish to be the Minister of Finance? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Did he tell you who the president 
wanted to be the Minister of Finance? 
MS GIGABA:  He said he wanted [indistinct]. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now after Mr Gigaba moved to the 
Department of Finance, did he continue to go to the Gupta 
residence?  You continued to go the Gupta residence? 
MS GIGABA:  Can you please repeat the question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  After Mr Gigaba moved to the, 
became the Minister of Finance, did he carry on going to 
the Gupta residence? 
20 
MS GIGABA:  After when he was at finance.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So what we are dealing with here is 
Mr Gigaba transfers from the Department of Home Affairs 
to the Department of Finance.  He becomes the Minister of 
Finance.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 350 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  When he was the Minister of Finance, 
did he carry on going to the Gupta residence? 
MS GIGABA:  Their relationship was not good by that time.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So let us then deal with the next 
heading.  Gifts, cash and benefits received from the 
Guptas.  Now you have already told us about the gold 
necklace that he gave to your elder son, correct?   
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Let us deal with other gifts.  There is 
10 
a heading that says the white three series BMW motor 
vehicle, the BMW.  Could you tell us about that? 
MS GIGABA:  They give him that car as a gift.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:  They gave him that car as a gift.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Who is they? 
MS GIGABA:  Guptas, AJ. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And when you say they gave it to 
him, how do you know that? 
MS GIGABA:  Because he went to collect it. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Where about did you collect it? 
MS GIGABA:  At Sahara.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Sahara computers? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And did you drive this car, this BMW? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 351 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  Yes, I did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Was it your private vehicle for a 
while? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it a BMW? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, and what colour?  Do you recall? 
MS GIGABA:  Say that again? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you recall what colour? 
MS GIGABA:  It was white.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was white.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And was it transferred into your 
name? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then what happened to the car? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Did you say, was this a new 
car as far as you know?   
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And ...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:  But I am not sure it was new new or it was 
20 
second hand, but it was new.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But it looked new.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say it was transferred into your 
name? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes, they did at some stage.  
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 352 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage? 
MS GIGABA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you, and then what happened 
to this car? 
MS GIGABA:  He gave it to, we took it to his friend to fix 
the lights.  It never came back.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then you deal with cash 
and benefits, there is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, before that, Mr Myburgh.  
10 
How did it come to be registered in your name?  Was this a 
gift for Mr Gigaba, was it a gift for you? 
MS GIGABA:   It was his – again that time - I am the one 
who was using the car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were? 
MS GIGABA:   I am the one who was using the car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but when it was given to him was it 
given as a gift or was it loaned to him to use as he 
…[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   It was a gift to him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS GIGABA:   It was a gift to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was a gift to him? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he allowed you – then he gave it to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 353 of 416 
 
you? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you got it registered in your name? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you say you took it to somebody to fix 
the lights? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then what happened about it?  It 
10 
never came back? 
MS GIGABA:   It never came back, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you take it there or Mr Gigaba took it 
there or somebody else? 
MS GIGABA:   I took it there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you not go back to fetch it? 
MS GIGABA:   I kept on asking about it until I decided to 
buy myself a car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who were you asking?  The person to 
whom you had taken it or Mr Gigaba? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Both. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Both? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and …[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   It is a friend. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 354 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the person to whom you took the car 
was his friend? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that person was somebody who 
fixes cars? 
MS GIGABA:   He said he will take it somewhere so that 
they fix the light for me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So it was nothing serious, it was 
just the lights? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you asked for it back what did 
that person say to you about it? 
MS GIGABA:   So he kept on telling me that when I come 
back, so at a certain stage I went to buy a car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You bought your own car? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Gigaba, did he tell you anything 
about the car about why it was not coming back? 
MS GIGABA:   I stopped asking him about it, so I decided 
to buy a car for myself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and you cannot remember the year 
when this car was given to Mr Gigaba as a gift? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not want to say exactly the year but I 
can check. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you remember which position he was 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 355 of 416 
 
holding at the time, what ministry he was in? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not remember the position but it was I 
think around 2015, there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Around 2015. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, but I am not sure but I can check 
because at certain point the car was under my name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Let us deal 
with wedding gifts of cash.  So we know that you married 
Mr Gigaba on the 30 August 2014.  Who did your wedding 
10 
planning and who did you invite to your wedding.  Did you 
invite the President?  Did you invite the Guptas. 
MS GIGABA:   We invited a lot of people but I did not have 
an access to invite Guptas or the President. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MS GIGABA:   I did not have an access to invite the 
President or Guptas so Malusi was inviting his friends, I 
was inviting my friends.  He was inviting his family, I was 
inviting my family. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So where it says: 
20 
“We invited both the former President and the 
Guptas but none of them attended.” 
Is that wrong? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, they did not attend. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes but is it wrong where it says we 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 356 of 416 
 
invited both the former President and the Guptas? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, they were invited but they did not 
come. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Mr Molefe was invited and he 
did attend, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, he did attend. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now did you get any wedding gift of 
any sort from the Guptas? 
MS GIGABA:   Not me, but Malusi said he did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did he tell you about that? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   There was a certain time when he told – 
because we knew about the Guptas prior the wedding that 
they were not coming, only President Zuma I think two 
days before the wedding that they were not coming.  So 
they gave him – so he said they will give him money as a 
gift as a compensation of their attending the wedding. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who paid for your honeymoon? 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Who paid for your honeymoon? 
MS GIGABA:   Ajay did. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Do you know how much money Mr 
Gigaba was given? 
MS GIGABA:   No, I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How do you know that it was Mr Ajay 
Gupta who paid for your honeymoon? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 357 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Because he told me when someone pays. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who told you? 
MS GIGABA:   Malusi told me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he told you that Ajay Gupta had paid 
for your honeymoon? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So the paragraph reads: 
“Mr Gigaba informed me that as a wedding gift the 
Guptas gave him a cash donation towards the cost 
10 
of the wedding in addition to paying for the cost of 
honeymoon in Dubai.  I do not know how much 
money the Guptas in fact gave.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not know. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But that paragraph, is it right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now how long did you go on 
honeymoon for? 
MS GIGABA:   I think we were there for a week. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And in what hotel did you stay? 
MS GIGABA:   I think it was a hotel called Waldorf. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The Waldorf? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   In Dubai? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 358 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes but I have to check exactly the name 
but I think it is something like that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now you go on to estimate how much 
your wedding cost.  How much was that? 
MS GIGABA:   It was 4 million to 5 million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who paid the wedding expenses. 
MS GIGABA:   It is me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how did you pay them? 
MS GIGABA:   I always paid them cash. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And where did you receive this cash 
10 
from? 
MS GIGABA:   He gave me because he was busy with his 
work. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:   Because that time it was during elections so 
he was busy with the work, so I was dealing with the 
wedding arrangements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So R4 million to R5 million for the cost 
of wedding appears to …[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   It was not even on the consultation I raised 
20 
that, it was not like he came to me with 4 million, said here 
is 4 million, 65 million, it was not like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   So my wedding was planned from 2013 
because I wanted to get married on my birthday which is in 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 359 of 416 
 
April 2014 and then it was not approved by parliament 
because that time it was during elections, most of the 
government ministers were busy so then we have to move 
the wedding date to Malusi’s birthday so it took like almost 
three years, so the payments were happening like that, it 
was not like there was a 4 million or 5 million came at 
once. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, even if it was not a possibly that 
was made at one time, it is still sounds quite a lot.  How do 
you know that it was about R4 to R5 million? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Because all the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that amount – is that number, is that 
figure [inaudible – speaking simultaneously]  
MS GIGABA:   It is the estimation, not like a specific 
figure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but is it an estimation that you made 
because you were using the money, you know the money 
that was available to you and you were using it? 
MS GIGABA:   No, it was not I was using the money that is 
available it was because of the – each and every person 
20 
who was part of the wedding preparation, like the caterer, 
they will send me their bill, flowers, people were preparing 
because my wedding was in Durban.  So each and every 
person – and my wedding happened two days, so it was not 
only for the white wedding, it was two weddings because it 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 360 of 416 
 
happened in two days. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] as well. 
MS GIGABA:   So prepared two weddings at the same 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   So it was like two caterers, one for the 
white wedding, one for the traditional wedding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   So it was like that, this venue and that 
10 
venue, this tent and that tent.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   So it was like in bits and pieces, not like we 
have a million, have never had a million at hand but it was 
more of maybe the caterer for the white wedding will send 
like 600 000, then they want a deposit then maybe I will go 
pay a certain amount and this one is for the venue at a 
certain -, so it was more of bits and pieces through the 
entire whole year and year and a half. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  And did you say you paid in 
20 
cash or you paid in different ways of paying? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, I paid cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  All the expenses were paid in 
cash or some were paid by EFT or whatever? 
MS GIGABA:   The one that I remember was paid in cash. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 361 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   In cash.  And when you say the estimate 
of the cost of your wedding, the estimate is R4 to R5 
million you think that either 4 million, 5 million was in cash 
at different times? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Throughout the year. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, Ms Gigaba, I just received a 
request from some of the technical people, they have 
10 
asked again if you could just try and speak a little bit more 
clearly.  Apparently your voice is dipping in and out, I can 
imagine it makes transcription difficult. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So did you not find it strange that 
you have been given all this cash?  I mean, where did it 
come from as far as you were concerned? 
MS GIGABA:   As I mentioned on the – unfortunately you 
were not there, so I did not find it strange because Malusi 
has been a minister for a very long time and also he told 
20 
me that he has savings with this money market that he 
saved monies from and most of the expenses we do not 
pay for them because it is paid by the state so most of the 
time his salary and my salary, we were using it to pay our 
stuff.  So to have a lot of cash, it was not something that 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 362 of 416 
 
was strange to me. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, I think perhaps we are speaking 
at cross-purposes, I am not suggesting that you found it 
strange that you could afford a wedding of this value, my 
question is more directed at why is everything being paid 
in cash?  As you say Mr Gigaba – the state paid a lot of his 
expenses, he had a good salary, he had a money market 
account but none of that explains why – just bear with me?  
None of that explains why one would be going around with 
large bundles of cash. 
10 
MS GIGABA:   When you say large you are talking about 
how much? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, to the tune ultimately of R4 to 
R5 million. 
MS GIGABA:   But I never said he walked around with R5 
million at once. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It added up to that. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, adding up to that, it is in bits in piece in 
a year and a half so if you break it down that – it is not 
that large.  It can be large to you but it was not large to 
20 
him and maybe to us, as a family because of how our 
expenses, we spend them because maybe the way you are 
just comparing, you are comparing by maybe a certain 
individual who have a salary and that salary, you have to 
pay for everything.  So our life was different from that.  So 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 363 of 416 
 
he has his salary, I have my salary and we hardly paid for 
anything in the house. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can I perhaps ask you a question in 
another way?  I understand what you are saying but did 
you think in your mind that Mr Gigaba was going to, for 
example, First National Bank in Sandton City with his 
bodyguards and was drawing these bundles of cash to give 
you to pay for flowers?  Is that what you think was 
happening? 
MS GIGABA:   Because most of the time, every January he 
10 
used to take the money that he is paid for the whole year 
from his  - what is this thing, market something, so 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Money market account. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, his money market because he used to 
pay for his – school fees was cash because he would say I 
save the money for the whole year, so he does that.  So 
sometimes he will sit with his financial adviser about his 
money.  Then end of the year or beginning of the year he 
will take out the money and then he will use his own 
20 
things.  So when there is extra money – so I do not know 
this one was coming from where it was, was it from him or 
from  - but – because I found it like that, so… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to – are you saying that it 
was normal or usual for him to give you amounts of cash 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 364 of 416 
 
that maybe somebody else might regard as large amounts 
but you did not regard as large amounts? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   Because to me what people do, will be 
shocked that oh, you have kind of money, for me it was 
normal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And what kind of amounts did you 
regard as normal in terms of cash that he would give you 
or he would have? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Maybe 50 000, 100 000, for me it was 
normal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was normal to have that, yes. 
MS GIGABA:   But maybe to other people it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Let us then turn to 
another topic under the heading: 
“Cash collected from the Gupta residence.” 
You say at paragraph 53 that Mr Gigaba had two close 
protection officers who accompanies him in the same 
20 
vehicle.  Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you knew one of them, what was 
his name? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not want to mention his name. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 365 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether – ja, it might be good 
not to mention the name because I do not know, you know, 
the drivers whether one of them …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Point taken, DCJ, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now let us have a look at paragraph 
54 and perhaps you can explain to us what you saw 
happening in relation to the collection of cash at the Gupta 
residence. 
MS GIGABA:   Can you please repeat the question? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did you see happening about 
the collection of cash from the Gupta residence? 
MS GIGABA:   I never(?) see collection of cash at the 
Gupta residence. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Right, that is the heading. 
MS GIGABA:   So I can say what I saw? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, tell us what you saw. 
MS GIGABA:   Sorry, on the cash? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   I think you have to ask the question in a 
20 
different way. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MS GIGABA:   Because I do not want to give the whole 
thing that you do not need. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay.  Well, this is important so let 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 366 of 416 
 
us go through it.   
“On several occasions that we attended the Gupta 
residence I personally observed Mr Gigaba leaving 
the adjacent meeting room.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you were sitting there, as you 
have explained, he was having meetings in the private 
meeting room, is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what would happen after he left 
the meeting room? 
MS GIGABA:   Well, sometimes he will ask his bodyguards 
to bring the bag. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To what? 
MS GIGABA:   He will ask his bodyguards to bring the bag 
from the car. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and would the bag then be 
brought? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Would it be given to Mr Gigaba? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   By the CPO? 
MS GIGABA:   What is CPO? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 367 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The close protection officer. 
MS GIGABA:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right?  And what would Mr Gigaba 
then do with the bag once it was given to him? 
MS GIGABA:   It looked like this was happening all the 
time, but the times that I remember.  So sometimes he will 
go in, in that room, and then when he will have tea he will 
leave with the bag, go to the room, but not like I saw the 
money. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how many bags did Mr Gigaba 
10 
have? 
MS GIGABA:   He had two big ones then one small one. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now can I just ask you to have a 
look at these annexures, I think this is another thing that 
we might have identified in the consultations.  We are 
talking about leather bags here. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now the annexures referred to 
paragraph 54 are A and B.  Is A and B the correct bag or is 
it C and D the correct bag? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Just give me a second?  Sorry, repeat the 
question? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So which bags – what are the correct 
photographs?  These bags that were brought to him at the 
Gupta residence that he would call for, are they the bags 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 368 of 416 
 
marked A and B or are they bags that looked like C and D? 
MS GIGABA:   That A, that leather bag, is more [indistinct] 
bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   The A, C and D because he had two bags 
like this, that were different. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  I think what I am getting to, Ms 
Gigaba, if you go back to paragraph 54, do you confirm 
that instead of reading A and B it should actually read C 
and D? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   It is A and D, the small bag and the big bag 
but now when you look at D, it is the brown bag.  He has 
the brown bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   He also have a black bag of a similar nature 
and also A and B is something similar, which he has a bag 
like that but it is one bag, but yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So let us just go back to paragraph 
54. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So he would call his CPO to bring in 
a leather bag, kept in the boot of the vehicle, the bag 
would be brought to him, he would go into the private 
meeting room, he would come out with the bag, the bag 
would be placed in the boot.  Now what bag are we talking 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 369 of 416 
 
about there?   Are we talking about bags that look like A 
and B or are we looking at – talking about bags that look 
like C and D? 
MS GIGABA:   The one goes in the boot, C and D. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:   C and D is the one that goes in the boot. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.  So if you go back to 54, at the 
end, that A and B should change to C and D.  Is that what 
you say? 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   If you go to the end of paragraph 54. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Where it refers to annexures A and B 
should correctly read C and D.  It was the big bag. 
MS GIGABA:   The big bag, is from C and D. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   And that is what I said because you guys, 
you asked this for a lot times at the consultation and I said 
the same thing and I am saying it again. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Ja. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   C and D, either it is those two bags, so I do 
not want to say only this bag because he has a black one. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright. 
MS GIGABA:   Sometimes he will carry this.  Also at D, it 
is a brown bag, he has this bag, similarly, Chair.  So 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 370 of 416 
 
sometimes he will take this back, he goes to the boot, he 
goes in with it but now A and B is the small bag that he 
always has with him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Did you come to learn of 
what was contained in these bags? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did you come to learn was 
contained in them? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   It was not all the time I saw what is in the 
bag but once we were in Sandton then I saw what was in 
the bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  So have a look at paragraph 
55.1.  Did you and Mr Gigaba go to Sandton City together? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   When did you do that? 
MS GIGABA:   What do you mean when? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Well, when you were at the Gupta 
residence were there times where you would go then to 
20 
Sandton City? 
MS GIGABA:   Sometimes we leave from [indistinct – 
dropping voice] or sometimes we will just leave from home. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what would happen when you 
went from the Guptas to Sandton City?  What would 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 371 of 416 
 
happen at Sandton City? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And again do not mention the name. 
MS GIGABA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you can talk without mentioning it. 
MS GIGABA:   So there was this one time then he opened 
the boot, then he got the money and he put it on this small 
bag, the small one that he carries it around his shoulder. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are making certain gestures I think 
towards you shoulder or hands – did he put it in his – did 
he carry it on his arm or shoulder? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   He always carries bag. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  Continue? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, so what would happen at 
Sandton City, would he go shopping, would you go 
shopping? 
MS GIGABA:   He will go to the shop, the HTK shop. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What shop? 
MS GIGABA:   HTK. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what would he do there? 
MS GIGABA:   Then they will give him clothes or suits, 
20 
then he will …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Please can you speak up, Ms 
Gigaba. 
MS GIGABA:   Sorry? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Please speak up.  Do you not want to 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 372 of 416 
 
lower the microphone a little bit?  Perhaps that will help.  
Alright.  So you say he would go shopping at the HTK 
store?  
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He would go shopping at the HTK 
store? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that what you say?  Would he 
shop at other stores? 
MS GIGABA:   Once in a while he go [indistinct], it was not 
10 
often. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So if we go to paragraph 55.2, I 
think you have already told the Chairperson that Mr Gigaba 
would transfer money from one bag to the other bag, is 
that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes he did that once in Sandton. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, when shopping how did he 
pay for whatever he was buying? 
MS GIGABA:   So most of the time he will give the money 
of the protectors. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of the protectors? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To go and pay. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes because when he got to the shop he 
never take the money and give it to them.  So he will take 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 373 of 416 
 
the money and give it to the protector and then he will go 
the restaurant, so the protector is the one who has paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would he take the money out of his 
wallet maybe? 
MS GIGABA:   He will take it from his bag.  So the other 
time he took him from the bigger bag, then he put on the 
smaller bag. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS GIGABA:   And then he will give to the protector to 
pay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  So at 55.2 you say: 
“On several occasions I also personally observed 
Mr Gigaba transferring money from his brown and 
black leather bags into his brown leather personal 
carry bag.  I attach a similar example of the 
personal carry bag obtained on an internet search 
marked C and D.” 
So is that …[intervenes] 
MS GIGABA:   So I did not say on several occasions 
20 
because several means many times, which I never said 
that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, so how many occasions? 
MS GIGABA:   So I saw him once in Sandton and the other 
time I saw the money it was at home which the instance 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 374 of 416 
 
that I mentioned here somewhere. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So you saw him once transfer? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So this personal carry bag, is that 
picture A and B or C and D?  Have a look at the photos 
again?  We are almost finished.  So you are talking about 
the bag that he transferred money into. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is it photographs A and B or C and 
D? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   C and D. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   C and D? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Are you sure? 
MS GIGABA:   Then he will transfer the money to a smaller 
one which is A and B. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Oh, the smaller was A and B? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Now did Mr Gigaba ever buy 
you anything in Sandton City? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  Now did Mr Gigaba ever buy 
you anything in Sandton City whilst shopping? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What he buy you? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 375 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   I think it was a bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he ever buy you anything else? 
MS GIGABA:   We never shopped together, like do my 
shopping [indistinct – dropping voice].  Because even with 
him he never go around do shopping at Sandton, so when he 
used to go to that certain shop they used to put the clothes 
aside for him.  So what he will go to – when he gets there he 
will just fit the clothes.  If they fit him he will take them and 
then maybe he will send the bodyguards to pay later or if 
they do not fit he will just give them – their tailor will fix 
10 
them for him, so he never goes around and do shopping. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So at paragraph 55.3: 
“Apart from a Louis Vittone handbag bought in 
Sandton City which Mr Gigaba paid in cash, he did 
not typically buy gifts for me with the cash collected 
at the Gupta residence.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:    Yes.  Sorry, sorry, sorry, say that again?  I 
am sorry, sorry, repeat? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   55.3: 
20 
“Apart from a Louis Vittone handbag bought in 
Sandton City which Mr Gigaba paid in cash, he did 
not typically buy gifts for me with the cash collected 
at the Gupta residence.” 
Is that right? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 376 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How many times did you see Mr 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Earlier on you said you 
never saw I think him with cash at the Gupta residence. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when here you say – you refer to 
cash collected at the Gupta residence, what is the basis 
for saying that? 
MS GIGABA:   I am saying that on the basis of – it was the 
10 
same bag that [indistinct – dropping voice]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   It was the same bag that the protector took 
aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS GIGABA:   When he called him, he got it in and he took 
it outside and when we got to Sandton he went with a similar 
bag then he took money – and when he opened the boot, it 
was me and the bodyguards and when he opened, so all of 
us were just shocked because it was me and the bodyguard. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry you say when he opened 
...[intervenes]  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Mr Gigaba opening the bag? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 377 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he opened the boot, is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   The bag was in the boot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and you and the – bodyguards 
arrived. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you see anything in the bag? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What did you see? 
MS GIGABA:   He took out the money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
10 
MS GIGABA:   And he put it in the...[intervene]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was their a lot of cash in the bag? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you say about half a bag or you 
are not able, but you know it was a lot of money. 
MS GIGABA:   No, I do not want to assume. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright, okay.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you Chairperson.  At 55.3 
after talking about the Louie Vittone handbag, you refer to 
the credit card that Mr Gigaba had given you, what was the 
20 
limit on that credit card? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not know what was the limit, what I 
know is he said I must not use it up to a specific amount, 
so I do not know what was the limit. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What did he say you could use it up 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 378 of 416 
 
to how much? 
MS GIGABA:   That I must not use it up to 100 000,00. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Beyond 100 000,00? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, but I never use it even closer to that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And when you were shopping 
overseas? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, when I got to overseas, he will give me 
money to buy stuff. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   How much money would he give 
you? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Sometimes 100 or 150 because overseas is 
expensive and I never stay there for like normally just 
travelled to overseas for one day.  So I need to be able to 
spend money for a whole week when I am there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say when you were travelling 
together overseas, he would give you money? 
MS GIGABA:   Most of the time I would travel alone 
without him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, without him, and then he would give 
you money to spend. 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and you say sometimes it would be 
100 000,00 sometimes 150 000,00, is that right?  
MS GIGABA:   Yeah, because sometimes I will use the 
cash and also I will use my own card as well from work. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 379 of 416 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright Mr Myburgh.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you did Mr Gigaba want you 
to shop in Sandton City? 
MS GIGABA:   No.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why not? 
MS GIGABA:   Because - when I am with him or when I am 
alone? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Whenever.  
MS GIGABA:   No, when we together he never wants to do 
shopping because also he is not that kind of a person who 
10 
just walks around the mall.  So if we leave home we would 
just go to the restaurant or he goes and purchase clothes.  
So he said, he does not want to walk around and do 
shopping because he is a public servant and also he does 
not want to walk around with cash, so when I will do that, I 
will do that when I am alone not with him.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   I see, and then a paragraph 56 you 
say that about a week after the Gupta wedding held at Sun 
City during 2013.  Mr Gigaba now visited the Gupta 
residence and then you talk about what happened on your 
20 
return home.  Can you explain that please? 
MS GIGABA:   What must I talk about? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   The paragraph, what happened once 
you returned home? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 56. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 380 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   56. 
MS GIGABA:   Oh, okay we went to Saxon. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right, what you deal with at 56: 
“On our return home, the CPO’s took the bag from 
the boot of his official vehicle.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And where had those bags come 
from? 
MS GIGABA:   It was the same bags that he takes in and 
10 
out when he is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When he is at the Gupta residents? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did Mr Gigaba then do with 
those bags? 
MS GIGABA:   He will put them in the study. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did you then go into the study? 
20 
MS GIGABA:   Sometimes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But on this particular day, did you 
enter the study? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did you see? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 381 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   I saw him packing money. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Packing money into what? 
MS GIGABA:   Into the safe. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   What was your reaction when you 
saw that?  
MS GIGABA:   I was shocked. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why? 
MS GIGABA:   Because he was just packing a lot of money 
from the bag. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did he tell you as to where 
10 
he got the money from? 
MS GIGABA:   He said he got it from Ajay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And did he tell you what it was for? 
MS GIGABA:   It is me who asked him what it was for. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes and what was his response? 
MS GIGABA:   He said it was for the elections because at 
that time he was the head of elections. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It was for the ANC elections? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then Ms Zizipho Gigaba 
20 
payment of her bad debt and employment at Sahara 
Computers.  Now you speak about the fact that during 2013 
Mr Gigaba’s father called us to a meeting at their family 
home.  Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 382 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what happened there? 
MS GIGABA:   I was not part of the meeting, I only asked 
him when we were on the way back t0 Joburg. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did Mr Gigaba tell you, as 
to what had been discussed? 
MS GIGABA:   He said his father asked him to assist to 
pay the credit bureau money that was owing on the credit 
bureau.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So had she been blacklisted? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you say that Mr Gigaba’s father 
asked him to help her? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And do you know; what debts it is 
that she had? 
MS GIGABA:   So he told me that she was owing 850 
000,00. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did Mr Gigaba – did Mr 
Gigaba agree to help her? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, he agreed but it was, I asked him like 
20 
where he is going to get that kind of a money.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, sorry.  
MS GIGABA:   I asked him where he is going to get that 
kind of money. 
 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 383 of 416 
 
 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what did he say in response? 
MS GIGABA:   He said he will go raise it with – he will go 
ask Ajay and he will go raise it for his sister. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, so, he said he would ask 
Ajay? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he ever then tell you whether or 
not Ajay had agreed? 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Did he tell you whether Ajay had 
agreed to give the money? 
MS GIGABA:   Ja, a few weeks later he told me that they 
will give him half, not all of it at once. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And was any arrangement made as 
to who would collect the money? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what was that arrangement? 
MS GIGABA:   He said to me, he spoke to Siyabonga 
20 
Mahlangu then he will assist his sister to clear her name 
on credit bureau and he will go collect the money from 
Ajay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Mr Mahlangu was to collect the 
money from Ajay and assist in clearing her name? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 384 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, because they said it was a better 
process to clear her name. 
 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mzipho Gigaba you have 
already told the Chairperson that for a time she worked at 
Sahara Computers. 
MS GIGABA:   Yes, she worked there. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then we deal with cash 
for renovations to Mr Gigaba’s on The Family Plot.  So 
10 
whereabouts is this in Kwazulu Natal? 
MS GIGABA:   It is in Mandeni.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mandeni, and what happened?  
MS GIGABA:   Where are you, on 61? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 60. 
MS GIGABA:   Okay, what is the question? 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
was 
there 
a 
building 
undertaken on the plot? 
MS GIGABA:   It was a renovation an extension and 
extension of the house. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And can you remember when this 
happened? What position did Mr Gigaba hold whilst these 
renovations were undertaken? 
MS GIGABA:   He was the DPE at the time. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who did the building work? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 385 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   It was his brother in law. 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And who paid for this? 
MS GIGABA:   It is him. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry? 
MS GIGABA:   Malusi did. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, and where did Mr Gigaba get 
the money from, did you come to learn of that? 
MS GIGABA:   So most of the time he will pay them cash 
and there was a certain time, he said he will go take the 
10 
money from Ajay and then you will fly to KZN so that time 
he flew there alone. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So, paragraph 61 says: 
“I learnt that Mr Ajay Gupta funded the building 
renovation.  When one day Mr Gigaba told me that 
he was going to get the money from Ajay Gupta to 
pay the builder.  He later called the same day to tell 
me that he was flying to Kwazulu Natal immediately 
to pay the builder.  I do not know the cost of the 
building renovations, etcetera.” 
20 
Is that correct?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Were you ever present when Mr 
Gigaba paid the builder in cash? 
MS GIGABA:   Sometimes. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 386 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Can you remember how many times? 
MS GIGABA:   Maybe two or three times. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, now a paragraph 63 it says: 
“Despite assurances that Mr Gigaba gave me I do 
not know if he officially declared any gifts, cash or 
benefits to the ANC and to the relevant government 
authorities.” 
Is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then we get to the next heading, we 
10 
have now only got two pages to go.  The Gupta money 
counter, can you explain to us about this Gupta money 
counter? 
MS GIGABA:   I do not like that part although it is not you 
but it is before the Commission so – it is not every time I 
will see that, I only saw it one, it was a function and this – 
that was the second function that I attended because this 
was the first one, and that was the second. And then we 
were taking a tour around the house and all of a sudden we 
saw this cash counter, but I thought it was an ATM because 
20 
I have never seen a case counter before. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what happened when you saw 
it? 
MS GIGABA:   When Ajay was demonstrating how it works? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how did it work? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 387 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:   So you just press - I do not know how the 
money was put in because I did not see when the money 
was put in but you just press maybe the amount of money 
then it takes the money out.  So that's the only thing I saw. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And how much money came out? 
MS GIGABA:   It was a lot of money but maybe 10 000,00 
but not like, a lot of money in terms of like 100 000,00 or 
something because he was just demonstrating. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright, so 64 you say: 
“In one of the visits to the Gupta residence when Mr 
10 
Gigaba was still Minister of DPE, we attended a 
function at the Gupta residence.  Ajay Gupta took 
us on a tour of one of the newly renovated houses 
in the Gupta compound.” 
Is that correct?  
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   “We were part of a small group of  
people who were unknown to me, he showed us a 
room that had been converted into a small cinema 
and in another area I saw a sauna.” 
20 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 65, as you have already 
said: 
“In one area I saw a device which looked like a 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 388 of 416 
 
small version of an automated teller machine, an 
ATM.  Mr Ajay Gupta demonstrated how it operated 
by punching an amount on the keyboard of the 
machine, which was 10 000,00, if I recall correctly, 
and it dispensed the cash notes in denominations of 
R100,00 and R200,00.” 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then we deal, you deal with the 
confiscation of my devices to destroy possible evidence.  
You say that: 
10 
“In February of 2020, you asked Mr Gigaba for 
divorce.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say: 
“You do not want to go into any detail but you wish 
to bring the following to the attention of the 
Commission.” 
What did Mr Gigaba ask you to do? 
MS GIGABA:   So he told me I must give him time because 
20 
he was dealing with - because that time he was busy doing 
his affidavit to come to the Commission, and also he was 
busy with his PhD.  So he said I must give him time 
because right now he is not in a state of doing the divorce 
and the Commission and his PhD at the same time. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 389 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So 61 says: 
“Mr 
Gigaba 
asked 
me 
to 
delay 
the 
divorce 
proceedings until after he appears before the 
Commission.” 
Is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you say that: 
“Around June of 2020 Mr Gigaba asked you for your 
electronic devices.” 
Is that correct?  
10 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what in what circumstances did 
he ask you for them, how did that happen? 
MS GIGABA:   He came to my room, he asked me to give 
him my phones and my laptop, then I asked him why. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what did he say in response? 
MS GIGABA:   He said there was someone at home who 
was an IT expert who was at home to assist us to delete 
some information so I asked him why our information must 
be deleted.  I think on that day he didn’t explain a lot of 
20 
things why and then there was a second time the person 
came then he asked for my information and then I refused 
to give him my gadgets so then he sat down he explained 
to me that the reason he wants my gadgets he wanted to 
get some information because he is about to wrap up his 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 390 of 416 
 
evidence, because of the Commission.  The problem why 
he wants my devices so then he made an example about 
when giving to the ...[indistinct] the time when there was 
that investigation about Brian Molefe so when Brian said 
he was at the Guptas, I don’t know if he said once or two 
times, and then the investigation showed that he was there 
so many times, so he used that example to me, he said he 
is about to wrap up his testimony, his evidence but now he 
already said he went to the Guptas two or three times, but 
now he is worried about my phone in case someone does 
10 
an investigation then they will see that we were there more 
than so many times, so I said to him why don’t you go to 
the Commission and tell the truth that you were there so 
many times, so he said he doesn’t want, then I refused to 
him my gadgets. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And were there photographs of trips 
that he was also interested in? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, photographs of what trips? 
MS GIGABA:   Even trips that we took together and trips 
20 
that I took by myself and the trips that we took with the 
State visits. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay and then paragraph 66.3, do 
you want to read that? 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 391 of 416 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Paragraph 66.3 do you want to read 
that? 
MS GIGABA:   I am so tired, can please read it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, tell me if it is right or wrong, 
we have one page left, we will see whether you fall asleep 
before I fall down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thankfully that is the last page? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That is the last page, thank you, I 
think everyone is keeping it ...[indistinct].   Now Mr Gigaba 
also asked not to – sorry Mr Gigaba also asked me not to 
10 
speak to the Commission nor Law Enforcement Agencies 
about Gupta visits, the cash and the gifts, is that right? 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then you talk about a domestic 
incident that occurred, what happened there? 
MS GIGABA:   This one I do not want to talk about it 
because it involves my kids, the domestic incident that 
happened, so for the safety of my kids I do not want to talk 
about it, but something happened on 18 t h of June. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay, but we know that that 
20 
domestic incident then gave rise to a high court judgment, 
which is referred to in the press and there is the citation 
given, is that correct? 
MS GIGABA:   Say that again? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It gave rise to a high court judgment 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 392 of 416 
 
in your favour. 
MS GIGABA:   I don’t understand the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, he is saying is it correct that as a 
result of that incident that you don’t want to talk about of 
the 18 t h June 2020 there was proceedings and a judgment 
that was handed down in your favour.   
MS GIGABA:   No that was another incident. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was another incident, okay, alright, 
okay.   Mr Myburgh the answer is that was another 
incident. 
10 
MS GIGABA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one that resulted in a judgment is 
another incident. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.   Do I understand correctly, I 
am terribly sorry but – do I understand that you do not wish 
to speak to this paragraph?  
MS GIGABA:   Ja, for the sake of my kids. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright.  And then the last thing 
deals with the loss of your personal passports, do you want 
to just deal with that quickly.   What happened to your 
20 
passports? 
MS GIGABA:   So last month when we were doing our 
consultation with the Commission team then because I 
wanted to be specific about dates because I don’t know the 
trips that we took when they happened, and also I don’t 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 393 of 416 
 
remember the personal trips and the State trips because I 
have two passports.   
 
So my entire staying with him we were not allowed 
to keep our diplomatic passports so each and every trip 
when we go overseas the PA takes it and the Department 
keeps it for us, so we are only allowed to keep our 
personal passports.  So what happened, because the 
Commission were asking me about certain trips and I didn’t 
want to give dates from the head, I wanted to be specific 
based on how those trips happened, so what happened on 
10 
that day in the evening I called his former PA, then I asked 
her do you have our travelling history or do you know what 
is the process of me getting my passport from the 
department.  Then she said she has the whole history and 
she will call me in five minutes. 
 
At that time I was driving from Sandton.   Then 
when I was about to get to Pretoria then I called her that I 
am still waiting then she said, but her tone changed, 
because when I called her in the first place she was like oh 
no, I  have everything, I will go through the system now, I 
20 
will send you everything and I can get you, I don’t 
remember who she said who will get my passport, because 
I don’t know who keeps it and she said I will get your 
passport right now. 
 
So then now 25 minutes later when I called her then 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 394 of 416 
 
she answered the phone she was like, then her tone 
already changed, she was like oh no, I don’t have the 
records, I cannot give you the passports, she doesn’t know 
how I am going to get my passports, but now she is the 
one who used to keep all my stuff and – but when I called 
before she said she has everything and she knows how I 
am going to get it, and then when I got home I was – let 
me just go on the personal one, because I made the copies 
in the morning on the day, then I forgot them when I was 
going to the Commission, so I wanted to balance with the 
10 
trips that I took with the State, with the trips that I took as 
personal trips and I wanted to put all of them. 
 
So I made copies in the morning and I put them in 
my passport.   I went to the Commission, so when I came 
back home after calling – because I was talking to the PA, 
so I was like I will call in the morning to check how to get, 
because now she was just totally blank. 
 
So when I got home my passport was not there, the 
copies were not there, so where I keep my passport it is 
closer to my bed, so it is my passport and my kids 
20 
passports, I keep them, all of them at the same place, so 
when I opened there I only found the cover of my passport, 
the pouch, then my passport was not there and my kids 
passport was not there as well, and then I was shocked, 
because they were there in the morning and I called 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 395 of 416 
 
someone – I called someone else who worked at Home 
Affairs, but he does not work there anymore, he was an 
official, then I asked him how do I get passports and the 
records, so then he told me the process, which I – he gave 
me an email of someone how do I get my trips from the 
immigration which I did, I wrote an email, because that’s  
how he told me what to do, and I did that, but in the 
morning – so the same day I sent the message to the 
Commission then I was like I got home and my passport is 
not here and in the morning I met the caucus, and also I 
10 
sent them the picture of the pouch and then I said I don’t 
have my passports anymore, can you please assist me to 
get the trips, because now I didn’t even know how do I get 
them. 
 
So then in the morning I sent an email to the 
Department, so they wanted – there is a lot of process for 
me to get past securities with it, but they said they will 
give me all the records from the immigration, so then after 
that I went to him, and I said Malusi where is my passport, 
because it was here yesterday and I have been keeping my 
20 
passport my whole life, so where is my passport.  So he 
said your passport, I didn’t see it, I was like okay where 
are the kids passports, he said I didn’t see them, then I 
was like that is very strange because passports were here, 
and I always keep them, so – but I am not saying I am 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 396 of 416 
 
saying a conclusion but what I think had happened, I think 
when I called the PA the PA called him, she told him, and 
that is why my passport was taken, so I only applied two 
weeks ago for a new one, so I haven’t go there to collect 
it, so where I am standing right now I don’t have my 
passport, and the one that, the diplomatic passport, I 
haven’t received the records but the Department said they 
can give me the whole trips, but I need to write a letter 
because there is a portion where they said I need to write 
a letter why they need to give me the trips, because I said 
10 
to them can they send them from 2009 to 2018, so I think 
anytime if I were to get them I will get them, so that is how 
my passport got lost. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So Chairperson we have no further 
questions for the witness.  I would like if I may – I know it 
is late, but to address you for the record on certain 
aspects of Ms Gigaba’s letter.   I don’t want to – I don’t 
want to become a witness in these proceedings and I don’t 
want to be seen to be cross-examining Ms Gigaba about 
these issues, obviously this is something that we as the 
20 
legal team take seriously and we are sympathetic to her 
plight, but there are some things that we need to correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So the first point which is 
overarching and important and something that Ms Gigaba 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 397 of 416 
 
has already accepted, is that throughout the production of 
her affidavit she was represented by a pre-eminent senior 
counsel, and that senior counsel was in fact responsible 
for procuring her signature of the final version of the 
affidavit. 
 
In paragraph 8 of Ms Gigaba’s letter, letter from her 
attorneys, she lists a number of concerns, as she is more 
than entitled to do.  Paragraph 8.1 and 8.2 relate to the 
change in evidence leaders, which you Chairperson have 
already addressed.  Then in paragraph 8.3 Ms Gigaba 
10 
refers to the fact that the affidavit contained certain things 
that are not within her personal knowledge and that seems 
to be correct and a process has been put in place to 
resolve that. 
 
At paragraph 8.4 she mentions that during the 
consultation that I had with her on the 8 t h of April mention 
was made of why these errors had not been picked up 
before, and she is also correct when she says that I 
proposed that that could be clarified in a supplementary 
affidavit, so we went through this affidavit, we noted 
20 
certain errors, and remember we were preparing Ms Gigaba 
for evidence.  We hadn’t as the evidence leaders finalised 
this affidavit, procured the signature on it, that had been 
done by her senior counsel.  So after this meeting I made 
contact with her senior counsel and I simply said to him 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 398 of 416 
 
you may want to consider dealing with these issues. 
 
So it was a situation where we realised there were 
errors, and we put in place a mechanism to try and clarify 
that, and in fact at 8.4 the letter reads: 
“As suggested by Advocate Myburgh and agreed to 
by our client these aspects could be clarified in a 
supplementary affidavit.” 
Now we had hoped that that supplementary affidavit would 
have been produced by now.  I have seen a draft copy of 
the affidavit prepared by Ms Gigaba’s former counsel.    
10 
 
Then we get to the issue of security concerns.   
Uhm, you mention at paragraph 8.5: 
“Serious security concerns pertaining to our 
client’s safety have been brought to the 
attention 
of 
the 
commission 
and 
an 
undertaking was made that the commission 
would look into this aspect.  Our client has 
not heard from the commission in this regard 
nor has she been offered any form of 
security or the courtesy of an explanation for 
20 
the failure to do so.” 
So here I am afraid that this is the one part where the 
versions of the two parties are irreconcilable.  Sakile Maseku 
has provided me with a flow chart of occasions where he has 
met and evidence leaders have met with Ms Gigaba and as I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 399 of 416 
 
understand it and I am new to this but as I understand it 
security measures were put in place right from the beginning 
but it came with a condition and that is that Ms Gigaba had 
to trigger the process. She had to say I want to take up your 
offer and as soon as she said that then those measures 
would be triggered.  And repeatedly she was reminded that 
she needed to take up the offer before the measures could 
be triggered and she did not do so.  So that is what I am 
instructed to (talking over one another.) 
MS GIGABA:  That is not true at all.  It is not true at all. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright well. 
MS GIGABA:  It is true.  I can say what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja – ja hang on – hang on Ms Gigaba let 
Mr Myburgh finish, make a note of what you want to say. 
ADV QOFA:  Apologies Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV QOFA:  I think it would be proper maybe if I do interject 
and clarify.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV QOFA:  I think it would be important that we do clarify 
20 
because we have consulted with Mr … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No wait until Mr Myburgh has finished.  I 
will give you a chance to clarify. 
ADV QOFA:  Okay.  Thanks Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So just so that I make sure that what I 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 400 of 416 
 
am saying accords exactly with what I am instructed.  And if 
necessary Chairperson we can put up an affidavit to deal 
with this we do not want to get in a big debate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  About this issue because obviously we 
have an interest in ensuring the safety and security of Ms 
Gigaba insofar as we can.  But for example Mr Maseku 
instructs me that on the 20t h and the 21s t of January Ms 
Mngoma consulted with state capture for two days.  On both 
days Ms Mngoma was offered security if she feels that her 
10 
life is in danger.  Ms Mngoma indicated that she is not 
scared and will continue with her affidavit. 
 
Then on the 8t h of February Ms Mngoma alerted state 
capture commission on threatening calls she had received 
and shared screen shots of some of these.  Calls are from a 
no number caller. 
 
On the 8t h of February investigators alerted the state 
capture head of security about the above.  On the 28t h of 
February investigator returned Ms Magma’s call – Ms 
Mngoma 
indicated 
that 
she 
had 
received 
additional 
20 
threatening calls with no name caller.  Ms Mngoma shared 
these with the investigators. 
 
On the 1s t of March investigator met with the state 
capture commission head of security and also shared screen 
shots of threatening calls.  Security options were discussed 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 401 of 416 
 
with the investigator which were later shared with Ms 
Mngoma.   
 
She indicated that she was okay for now will advise 
once she has decided to take up the security option. 
 
On 
the 
4t h 
of 
March 
Ms 
Mngoma 
called 
the 
investigator regarding additional threatening calls screen 
shot shares – screen shot shared.   
 
10 March Ms Mngoma called the investigator she 
advised that she felt unsafe.  Investigator alerted her that 
state capture commission is awaiting her to advise when she 
10 
is ready to take up the security option.  She indicated that 
she will move and stay somewhere.  
 
20 March state capture commission consulted with 
Ms Mngoma and her legal advisors.  At the end of the 
consultation Ms Mngoma advised that she still needs to 
advise the state capture commission when she is ready to 
take up the security offer. She indicated that she will get 
back to the state capture commission. 
 
8 April state capture commission consulted with Ms 
Mngoma.  Ms Mngoma informed that she still needed to 
20 
advise state capture commission once she had decided to 
take up the security option. 
 
Now there may be different ways of viewing this but 
what you can see on these instructions is that investigations 
are undertaken.  A system was put in place that needed to be 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 402 of 416 
 
triggered so that is from what I am instructed. 
 
Then the next complaint is the client’s first affidavit 
was leaked to the media and the commission undertook to 
investigate the source of the leak and revert to her.  That 
investigation is at a – I am told a very advanced stage.  Not 
quite as simple as it might appear but action is being taken. 
 
Then the next concern and I am not saying they are 
unfounded or without merit but on each of these things you 
will see that there has been an attempt – there has been 
interaction – there has been work done by the commission. 
10 
 
8.7 the complaint is our client also highlighted to the 
commission her discomfort about the commission sharing of 
her affidavit with Ajay Gupta without informing her or her 
legal team. 
 
Now I am told that that is wrong.  That there was in 
fact a discussion and Ms September will correct me if I have 
got this wrong because I am told this evening – there was in 
fact a discussion between Ms Nkobe and Mr Pretorius about 
the fact that her 3.3 had to be issued in relation to Ajay 
Gupta because he was so central – is so central to this 
20 
affidavit and the 3.3 was then issued in that context. 
 
So it was done in consultation with her legal team. 
MS GIGABA:  That is not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on.  Ms Gigaba I will give you a 
chance after Mr … 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 403 of 416 
 
MS GIGABA:  And then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will give one of you a chance not both of 
you – you or your counsel.  Let us  
ADV MYBURGH SC:    It is that stick that has got to handed 
around. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.    
ADV MYBURGH SC:    And then at 8.8 the commission has 
wrongly suggested that our client volunteered to come to the 
commission when the correct version is that she was 
approached.  We accept entirely that – that she was 
10 
approached by Sikele Maseku after ENCA intervened. 
 
So Chairperson that is – that is the position from our 
side.  It is not something that we want to enter into any sort 
of acrimonious discussion or debate but obviously we accept 
that Ms Mngoma and her counsel may very well have a 
different view that we must respect and then we must find 
out a way to get to the bottom of things with your – with your 
direction and advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I will allow one of you and not both of 
you so … 
20 
ADV QOFA:  Chairperson I think 00:07:46 that we  
CHAIRPERSON:  Counsel – Counsel you should be the one 
because you are here and she… 
MS GIGABA:  No I rather talk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She has brought you here so you can 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 404 of 416 
 
speak on her behalf. 
MS GIGABA:  No I was saying I think it is only fair that she 
expresses herself Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you prefer that she – okay. 
ADV QOFA:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Ms Gigaba do you want to say 
anything. 
MS GIGABA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In response. 
MS GIGABA:  About the – the changing of the leaders if you 
10 
took that decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS GIGABA:  So when Paul Pretorius was leading this 
whole consultation we took like three to four hours in a day 
preparing and we got comfortable with him leading it then he 
knows and he promised that he would be one – he will be the 
one who will be leading the evidence.  Then only two weeks 
ago then the 00:08:41 came. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Myburgh. 
MS GIGABA:  And most of the things he was not aware – 
20 
okay there is errors here there was errors there because the 
team was aware of the errors.  And he was not aware 
because he was new to the team.  I only saw him once and I 
was so uncomfortable to come that he must come and lead 
my evidence because I did not prepare with him the entire 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 405 of 416 
 
preparation he was not there it was someone else.  So – and 
also my senior counsel did not even know as well when he 
was changed so both of us were shocked or – because he 
promised us that he is the one who will lead so why they 
changed and why were we not told.  That was one concern. 
 
So when it comes to the security every time I will tell 
Sikele here is this and there was not one point when Sikele 
was showing the threats what was happening even himself 
he was – he said to me this is so scary this is getting out of 
hand.  He is the man he was even scared himself.  What 
10 
about me as the woman?  
 
And then he said to me I will talk to the head of the 
security I will come back we need to do something and on 
that day he did not come back.  And then when we were 
having our second consultation then those issues were 
raised by my senior counsel and in the meeting all of us 
were so cool because they said no they explained how the 
security works and then I have to choose to be taken in a 
place of safety or they would – I will be given a security.  But 
they said each and every meeting so and so will contact you. 
20 
 
So no-one has ever contacted me after the meeting. 
The last consultation where the threats were so bad and then 
– then they said oh he said the head of the security says 
show us the proof.  Then I took all the proof I show it to 
them.   
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 406 of 416 
 
 
And then what happened he – so the head of the 
security came to the meeting.  So they said we heard your 
concerns here is the head of security he will take care of 
your concerns because we can see – and I think they were 
taking it seriously all 00:10:50.  Then they said the head of 
the security will contact you after this. 
 
So I do not even have the number of the head of the 
security and he explained also how the security will work.  
So every time they will say that in the meeting but no-one 
has ever contacted me.  So no-one told me that I have to call 
10 
them because I called them to say there is these now – there 
is these – I think this is getting out of hand – now I am 
scared. 
 
And then they will say okay we will go the 00:11:24 
someone will contact you.  So no-one has ever called me to 
say okay here is the decision – so I do not understand where 
it was my fault because I told them they were supposed to 
call me to say here is the security.  The last meeting we 
were with them the head of the security was there.  They 
said this is his name he will contact you – he did not contact 
20 
me and then I thought just because my life was so in – 
because I was receiving those threats on a daily basis. A lot 
of calls closer to hundred.  I have never seen such a thing.  
But there was a time where things that came a bit slow and I 
told them I was on.  So I said for this week I did not receive 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 407 of 416 
 
any calls but still I am so scared because in the beginning 
when they offered me the security there was nothing.
 
All these things came once my affidavit – when my 
affidavit and the media knew about it and my affidavit – 
Malusi have – Ajay have then that is where all these threats 
were a bit hectic. 
 
So in the beginning when they offered me the 
security I told them that no I am not scared because no-none 
has threatened me so I did not want to lie and say I need a 
security when I do not need it. I said no I am not scared 
10 
there is nothing.   
 
But when they started coming I told them and they 
said they will contact me.  So no-one in the commission has 
ever called me to say okay based on the meeting here is the 
security.  That is where I became so uncomfortable that the 
commission they want me to give evidence and this evidence 
come with a lot of threats in my life.  Because everyone 
when they were calling me they were like where is your 
evidence – we want to see your evidence.  We want to come 
and collect the evidence.  Then to deaths go to the 
20 
commission.  My life became so miserable during the 
process and I was telling them there is no even one person 
in this commission who said here you are coming with the 
security go find a security.  Even the  last meeting my former 
senior counsel he raised those questions and he was like 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 408 of 416 
 
guys what happened – what is happening with the security?  
They said no we are – we will sort it out.  He – after here at 
the meeting they will contact Mngoma so these are the 
measures.  So they explained how the commission take the 
measures but no-one has contacted me.  So it is – so – so it 
is not true that I was supposed to call because I already 
called.  So what type of call must I say?  So that – that is the 
second thing. 
 
About that I am not leaving anything.  Yeah I think 
that is it unless someone 00:14:18 can remind me if you 
10 
remember earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS GIGABA:  But the situation – I am very failed because I 
even said it that I felt like the commission did not protect me 
and I was cooperating with them and what I do not 
understand it was that day they said I did not appear on the 
commission I agreed on a Friday.  On that Friday I said 
everything.  They said to me when I land in Cape Town I will 
be taken somewhere to give my evidence.  Then I said I am 
not going to do that because the – how the commission is 
20 
linking everything I do not want – because I have done 
everything to cooperate with the commission and the 
commission will say something and then they would never 
met everything that they promised me.  Or when it comes to 
this the leaking of my affidavit so the commission said to me 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 409 of 416 
 
everything is confidential.  Hence I did not even have time to 
read and read my affidavit a lot because we were not 
allowed to be – they said they cannot send this electronically 
– my affidavit because everything needs to be treated 
confidential.  And they promised me that there are a very few 
people in the commission who will have my affidavit.  So my 
senior – former senior counsel he did not know that my 
affidavit was shared with Ajay.  How it came about?  So I 
received a call from Sunday Times.  Sunday Times said to 
me we have your entire affidavit.  Then I was shocked 
10 
because how can they have my entire affidavit when the 
commission said to me my affidavit would be treated with – 
confidential until I appear to the commission.  And then I 
called them and I was very angry I even called the former 
00:16:06 so on that day all of us we met in the afternoon.  I 
raised my concerns that how come you guys leaked my 
affidavit so they said to me no it is not the commission who 
leaked it maybe it is Malusi.  Then my former counsel was 
like there is no way Malusi would leak the affidavit because 
it implicates him.  So on my way going to the meeting one of 
20 
the – one of the commission team he said to me no you are – 
your affidavit was given only to two people the entire 
affidavit which is Malusi and Ajay Gupta.  Then I was like I 
did not know that my affidavit was given because my senior 
counsel told me that my affidavit would be given to Malusi. 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 410 of 416 
 
 
So when we got to the meeting he asked all of them 
like how Ajay Gupta got – he was given my affidavit without 
his knowledge and he did not know that?  So no-one said – 
he did not know about it and he was like why guys gave him 
– my client’s affidavit because he does not even cooperate 
with the commission?  He is not even prepared to come to 
the commission so why you are giving him the affidavit? 
 
And on that for me my question is because we were 
not allowed to receive the affidavit via electronic – electronic 
Ajay – Ajay Gupta stays in Dubai so how did he receive it?  
10 
So us who are cooperating with the commission then they 
brought it to me via the other day they – it was the USB then 
after that it was copies.  But now Ajay Gupta have my entire 
– so I felt like the commission did not keep to their promises. 
 
So I said because of that I do not want to come to the 
commission, I do not want to give my – because you say this 
and you say that and I was not happy that my affidavit was 
given to Ajay without me being told  because they told me a 
few days ago that they would give my affidavit to Malusi and 
I asked why then they said they quoted why he needs to be 
20 
given – and what what and also because of his implicated in. 
 
Then I understood but Ajay, myself the former 
counsel we did not know about it.  And then the leak to the 
Sunday Times that one I did not take it well because I felt 
like my affidavit was supposed to be protected especially 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 411 of 416 
 
because the entire team of the commission knew that my life 
was under threat. 
 
So when my – my affidavit was sent – was leaked to 
the media so what they did the day we met all of us.  My 
former senior counsel was upset as well.  Myself was like 
this but they apologised. They said they would do an 
investigation because each and every copy of the affidavit 
has a mark on so the commission will know who leaked the 
affidavit. 
 
 
And I am still waiting for that because I have not 
10 
received that exact – who leaked the entire affidavit. 
 
So those were the concerns that made me not to 
adhere 
to 
the 
commission 
not 
just 
because 
I 
was 
disrespectful of the commission or I was undermining the 
commission.  I thought like the way everything was treated it 
was not in the manner that I was promised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Chairperson - I am sorry Chair.  I just 
have – I – I would like to correct something that I said as 
soon as I can? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I having listened to Mr Gigaba about 
Ajay Gupta receiving the affidavit I asked Ms September 
whether I was right in relation to what I had told you that 
there was a discussion between Mr Ngotome and Mr 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 412 of 416 
 
[Indistinct] about the affidavit being sent to Ajay Gupta. 
 
He tells me there was no discussion what I said to 
you was there was a discussion about the timing of the 
issuing of the 3.3’s it was not a discussion particularly 
around Ajay Gupta so Ms Gigaba may very well be right.  
She tells me of course that who is implicated and to whom 
3.3’s must issues clearly as a matter of law.  So there was 
not a – there was not a discussion expressly around (not 
speaking into mic). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Ms Gigaba it is – it is good 
10 
that you have articulated what your concerns were and are 
and the legal team has dealt with those matters that they are 
able to deal with.  I think Mr Myburgh it would be good that 
there be an affidavit that explains everything from the side of 
the investigators. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or the legal team in response to the – to 
the  concerns and a copy thereof obviously should be made 
available to Ms Gigaba’s legal team and once they have got 
it it would be up to them whether they want to file an 
20 
affidavit that responds to it and then one can it from there 
just so that we know exactly as far as possible exactly what 
happened.  So that is the one point. 
 
The second point I want to make is that with regard 
to leaks Ms Gigaba you may or may not be aware but during 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 413 of 416 
 
in – in 2018 soon after the commission had started having 
hearings we had a problem of witness’ affidavits leaking or 
finding their way to the media and we were not sure whether 
it was happening from within the commission or whether it 
was people who were served with copies in terms of the 
rules of the commission that is people who were implicated 
 
I went on record and said that I was asking the 
investigation team to investigate how that had happened 
because a number of people were also complaining and 
there was an investigation that was done then and I do not 
10 
think it was the only one I think later there was another one 
and I had appealed to the media please not publish 
information from the commission that is not authorised – that 
is not official and a lot of media houses complied but there 
was one or two that did not comply and publicly I have talked 
about them I have said which ones they are.  I know that one 
of them is I think Sunday Independence or Independents on 
Sunday and I think at a certain stage Business Day also did 
that - did not comply but a lot of other media houses 
respected the processes of the commission. 
20 
 
But the point I want to make to you to make you is 
that the investigations that in the past have been conducted 
have not always been able to determine exactly how whether 
the media got the information from the commission or from 
somebody else. I think maybe at some stage there was an 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 414 of 416 
 
investigation that said the leak would not have come from 
the commission must have come from outside.  I am not sure 
but investigations have been done in the past. Some of the 
investigations have not been able to pin down who exactly 
did that. 
 
So – but Mr Myburgh has said that he has been told 
that the investigation in regard to this leak is at an advanced 
stage and – so once it has been completed he will need to – 
the commission will need to let you know exactly what the 
outcome is. 
10 
 
So any leak of information that has not been 
presented to the commission and by way in a public hearing 
is most regrettable. But I just make the point that we have 
been talking about it   There have been investigations in the 
past and whereas a number of media houses have respected 
our – respected our processes. There are some who have 
not done so.   
 
So but once the investigation has completed the – 
you will be notified what the outcome is. 
MS GIGABA:  Okay can I ask something? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS GIGABA:  So since you have heard all my concerns and 
also I think you are aware I have been cooperating with the 
commission and I feel for you to summon me it was a bit 
harsh because I just did not – not just come to the 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 415 of 416 
 
commission.  So now in terms of this summons where do we 
stand? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the summons you have complied with 
the summons is it not?  You have been summoned – you 
have been - you have complied with summons and the 
summons was issued because your legal representative 
informed the commission that you had withdrawn your 
participation you had decided to withdraw it and you have 
confirmed that you had withdrawn it so the issuing of the 
summons was fine.  So it was fine.  You may have had 
10 
certain concerns but once you – we were aware that you had 
information that is important for the commission you had 
deposed to an affidavit, you had undertaken to come to the 
commission but you changed your mind.  It was proper that  
summons be issued. 
MS GIGABA:  That is – now are you aware that I am not just 
did not come to the commission? 
MS GIGABA:  Well I am aware that you have certain 
concerns I think at that time it was said that you did have 
certain concerns but I think we – it was made clear even 
20 
then I think I must have said that even if you had – you had 
concerns you needed to come to the commission and 
articulate your concerns here rather than say I am not going 
there because of whatever concerns. 
 
If you had come here and articulated your concerns 
26 APRIL 2021 – DAY 382 
 
Page 416 of 416 
 
then that would have been different.  Okay.   
 
We – this is the longest session that we have had.  It 
is now about twelve minutes past eleven.  I think we need to 
adjourn and we do need to adjourn because although it is a 
public holiday tomorrow some of us will be working.  So the 
commission will be sitting tomorrow this is for the benefit of 
the public.  I will be hearing the evidence of Mr Mosebenzi 
Zwane former Minister of Mineral Resources tomorrow. 
 
So we – we will continue with evidence to try and 
finish our work within time.  I take this opportunity to thank 
10 
everybody for their cooperation for us to have been able to 
sit until this time.  Thank you to the staff and the 
technicians, thank you to you Mr Myburgh and your team.  
Thank you to Ms Gigaba – thank you to her team for their 
cooperation.  Thank you very much to everybody for having 
cooperated so that we could sit late and finish Ms Gigaba’s 
evidence.   
 
If her team wishes to re-examine arrangements can 
be made for the re-examination to happen at another date – 
another time but then they would have to communicate that. 
20 
 
Thank you very much – we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 27 APRIL 2021 
