 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 340 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 193 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 3 of 193 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 09 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Freund, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Good morning Chair. 
PROF CALLAND:  Good morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Technicians will you please put on – 
switch on the screen.  You must just always check whether 
it is on before I come in.  Okay alright.  Are you ready Mr 
Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes thank you Chair may I proceed? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes 
you 
may 
proceed. 
 
Professor 
Calland. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Professor Calland. 
PROF CALLAND:  Good morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning, good morning.  The oath 
you took yesterday will continue to apply this morning. 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr –  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Mr Calland we were at – thank you 
Chair.  Mr Calland we were at page 19 in Bundle 3 and I 
would – we were dealing with the question of the position 
of the member of Parliament in holding the Executive to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 4 of 193 
 
account.  You make the point that much reference has been 
made to about the oath of office and then you say there is 
a tension between the abstract constitutional duty to the 
people and the very real political sanction for dissidence 
and when we adjourned last evening you would refer to the 
provision in the constitution that requires a member of 
Parliament who loses membership of that members’ party 
to leave Parliament.  And I would just like to pick it up from 
there.  You deal with the economic implications for 
members of Parliament of the problems of – of rebellion or 
10 
dissidence from party instructions.  If you could maybe just 
talk to that very briefly? 
PROF CALLAND:  Well this came to my attention relatively 
early in my – in my relationship as it were with Parliament 
and my understanding of the institution itself.  And in fact I 
deal with this episode in my report as a mini case study 
and I am talking up here about the arms deal. 
 
The arms deal scandal as it became known had a 
very serious (audio break) Themba Godi.  SCOPA overall 
has been one of the better and strongest committees in 
20 
Parliament and in fact during the early part of the post-’94 
period during the First Parliament SCOPA I think was the 
committee that first really got its teeth into the concept of 
oversight.  It was the first committee to really start to 
grapple with the challenge of oversight and to exercise its 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 5 of 193 
 
oversight function. 
 
And it developed a certain practice in that regard 
which I think hinged largely on its relationship with the 
Auditor General.  There was a very significant and fruitful 
relationship there. 
 
All of that was ripped apart by the arms deal 
because SCOPA then became a victim collateral damage as 
it were to the attend by the ruling party to close down the 
issue and to politically manage the issue in their language. 
 
And I followed those proceedings very, very closely 
10 
and one of the things that came to my attention and this is 
now in the public domain so I feel comfortable referring to 
it because Andrew Feinstein an ANC MP at the time has 
written about this and it is on the record on all of this. 
 
Now he made it clear to me that the pressure that 
was brought to bear on the ANC Study Group that is to say 
as you – as you well know now the ANC members of 
Parliament of a particular committee form themselves into 
a Study Group.  The pressure that was brought to bear on 
the that Study Group by the leadership of the party in 
20 
different forms was really excruciating and in there Mr 
Feinstein of course himself was pushed out.  He left 
Parliament and left the ANC and left the country in the end. 
 
But some of his colleagues I know from their own 
accounts and indirectly through Mr Feinstein Section 47(3) 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 6 of 193 
 
was used as a pressure point and it was used to say 
basically, do you want to remain a member of Parliament 
with all of the benefits that come with that or are you 
willing to risk that and risk the reputation of the ANC by 
continuing to exercise the oversight that you are in asking 
the difficult questions that SCOPA at that point was trying 
to ask in relation to the arms deal. 
 
So several members or colleagues of Mr Feinstein 
in the end backed down – they backed down from their 
initially quite strong positions because they feared losing 
10 
their position in Parliament and they could not afford to 
lose their position in Parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well that is really the point that I want 
to come to is the – is whether the average MP can afford to 
lose their job as a MP? 
PROF CALLAND:  So I think Mr Feinstein would probably 
be one of the first people to accept that he is an unusual 
position. First of all he had had a career in I think 
Merchant Banking before coming to Parliament.  He had 
other skills; he had other experience and he was able to 
20 
move out of Parliament and find comfortable employment 
elsewhere and build a new career elsewhere.  Not every 
member of Parliament has that possibility and those that 
do not like anybody I guess – all of us probably would cling 
therefore as much as possible to their position for fear of 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 7 of 193 
 
losing it.  And of course I think as the different Parliaments 
have gone by and we may come to that today I suspect in 
evidence in due course but as I would say the experience, 
quality and calibre of members of Parliament particularly 
the 
ruling 
party 
has 
declined 
over 
a 
succession 
of 
Parliaments. 
 
So the opportunity to pursue a different career 
elsewhere out of Parliament has also diminished for 
obvious reasons.  And if your – your talent base of folks 
coming into Parliament is weaker then it seems to me that 
10 
this point about members of Parliament being dependent 
on that position and therefore even more fearful of that 
sword of Damocles falling on their head through Section 
47(3) is even greater. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Well let us deal with that issue now. 
You emphasised yesterday the very high calibre of the 
initial ANC contingent to the First Parliament.  Could you 
just give us a thumbnail sketch of how that has developed 
over six Parliaments? 
PROF CALLAND:  Well in ball brush strokes yes.  As I said 
20 
yesterday that First Parliament ’94 to ’99 was quite 
remarkable because of the extraordinary depth of talent 
and experience and wisdom that was deposited there. 
 
The ANC as I said yesterday deployed virtually all 
of its leadership and its senior people into Parliament.  As 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 8 of 193 
 
that – as time went by I think Mr – later President Mbeki 
realised and the leadership of Parliament realised that we 
could not and perhaps politically should not put all of your 
eggs in one basket you need to deploy your – your talent in 
different places and that process began. 
 
So 
Parliament 
by 
Parliament 
as 
the 
different 
Parliaments went by what I observed as an observer 
sometimes spending a lot of time in Parliament, sometimes 
lesser was a weakening of the quality and experience and 
political weight and perhaps this is the most important 
10 
point because what we are looking for in oversight is the 
ability of a member of Parliament to sufficiently – to act 
sufficiently independently, to be able to say it may be that 
this will cause embarrassment to the government and or to 
the ruling party, my party but unfortunately my duty is to 
the constitution, my duty is as a member of Parliament to 
ask the right questions, to raise difficult issues even if that 
is politically costly. 
 
That requires a tough skin.  It requires independent 
mind and it requires the ability to insulate yourself from 
20 
potentially career limited to use the euphemism, career 
limiting consequences for you and yourself.  And as the 
time has gone by I have seen that the – a number of 
members of Parliament who would fall into that category 
has declined Parliament by Parliament. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 9 of 193 
 
ADV FREUND SC:  Now apart from questions of political 
weight I would like just to focus very briefly on questions 
of skill and diligence.   
 
So for example Mr De Freitas gave evidence that in 
the committee overseeing PRASA his belief was that many 
of the members of that committee had not opened the 
packs of paper that they had been furnished before the 
meeting started.  And – and – so if you would – whether 
you have any experienced that would either back that up or 
contradict that and also your view on the – on the skill and 
10 
training and expertise of members of Parliament as time 
has gone by? 
PROF CALLAND:  Mr Freund there is some big issues 
contained within your questions there but let me – let me 
try and do justice to them. 
 
I think it is absolutely clear that if you are a 
relatively inexperienced member of Parliament, if you 
relatively junior in your party’s political hierarchy the more 
training you can get the more support you can get in 
playing the service cycle the better. 
20 
 
And it is clear to me that that – that training that 
capacity building is not present.  And nor as several 
witnesses I have said – have said to the commission in the 
last week and nor is there the independent research and 
other capacity in the committee system available to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 10 of 193 
 
members of Parliament.  It is a kind of 00:10:41. 
 
It seems to me if the strongest committees in 
Parliament around the world are those that have an 
independent research capacity that can do the job for 
MP’s.  Can provide them with briefings.  Can in a sense 
steer 
them 
towards 
appreciating 
what 
are 
the 
most 
important issues of the day in relation to the particular 
topic that comes before the committee and can therefore 
prepare them to ask the best questions. 
 
Now if you combine the absence with that with the 
10 
fact that as I think it was Ms Rantho who told the 
commission 
last 
week 
that 
often 
the 
witnesses 
for 
committees come before them at very short notice. Often 
the documents that they bring with them should have been 
prepared a week before often already presented on the 
day.  I have seen that countless times, more often than 
not. 
 
And 
so 
invariably 
a 
committee 
is 
simply 
not 
prepared to – to digest the material and to ask the right 
questions.   And as you and I know and as – that the Chief 
20 
Justice 
well 
knows 
when 
trying 
to 
master 
a 
brief 
particularly if it is complex you need enough time to read 
the brief and you need enough time to reflect on what is 
really involved in that brief and to formulate in your mind 
the most important questions to pose. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 11 of 193 
 
 
And time and again I see in committees fail to do 
that for a variety of reasons.  Partly lack of training and 
capacity, partly a lack of research, capacity for the 
committee and partly I am afraid to say lack of political will 
within the committee. 
 
And more often than not in recent years recently 
committee members particularly on the benches of the 
ruling party who have simple not done their job, not taken 
the trouble to prepare themselves. 
 
And in the end of course I really appreciated what 
10 
Ms Rantho had to say when she said we really did not take 
a stand at one point, I heard her say in her evidence.  And 
that really very crisply puts the point that when it comes to 
the power of a committee and individual members within it 
it is their willingness to take a stand on a particular issue 
that may well be the decisive factor as to whether the 
service site function is properly played or not. 
 
And more often than not the stand is not taken. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Right now I want to move onto 
something more conceptual than factual.  You deal at 
20 
pages 20 to 21 with what does oversight and accountability 
really mean and you quote one of the English authorities.  
This is at page 21 of Bundles in the first paragraph you 
quote Turpin and Tomkins saying: 
“The 
Parliamentary 
control 
over 
the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 12 of 193 
 
Executive and I quote “means influence not 
direct power, advice not command, criticism 
not obstructions, scrutiny not initiation and 
publicity not secrecy.” 
 
But you also refer later in your report to two 
conceptions of oversight and accountability which you call 
the hard version and the soft version. 
 
So I would like you just to comment generally on 
what is an incredibly difficult question which is what are 
the limits of proper Parliamentary scrutiny and oversight? 
10 
PROF CALLAND:  So it is a complex and very I think very 
delicate question and it is one that I think the commission 
is clearly already wrestling with and it is going to have to 
wrestle with if it is to offer if I may say so Chair cogent 
recommendations in this regard. 
 
But I see it in these terms Mr Freund that there is a 
spectrum. At 
one 
end 
of 
the 
spectrum 
is 
where 
a 
Parliament and its committees does nothing.  In other 
words it is completely negligent; it completely fails to even 
begin to – to do what is required of it. 
20 
 
 At the other end of the spectrum is when it does 
too much.  Now that is very difficult too but why too much I 
mean a serious and grave bereaves of separation powers 
will be when the lesser branches of government tries and 
maybe succeeds in becoming the Executive. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 13 of 193 
 
 
Now clearly that is inappropriate.  Parliament 
cannot over – take over the role and function of the 
Executive arm of government.  And therein lies the limit 
because if somewhere between those two ends of the 
spectrum Parliament is trying to exercise oversight.  It is 
trying to meaningfully say to the Executive, this is what we 
expect of you either by remedying a previous role or taking 
new action. 
 
And if in those circumstances the Executive does 
not respond appropriately, does not do what Parliament 
10 
asks of it what the can Parliament do?  It cannot take over 
the role of Executives so it cannot command, it cannot take 
direct power. 
 
And interesting this cropped up of course in the 
House of Commons quite recently with the Brexit debate 
where Parliament was in a sense trying to take control of 
the negotiations with the European Unions.  It was trying to 
prescribe to the Executive arm of the British government 
what it should or should not to in those negotiations and 
the Executive was pushing back very hard against it.  
20 
Parliament say no that is our job we are the Executive. 
 
But finally to complete this answer which could go 
on a lot longer so I will try and bring it to a conclusion at 
this point.  Somewhere between these two poles there is 
an equilibrium point. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 14 of 193 
 
 
Now on either side of that equilibrium point on one 
side is what I would call the soft accountability power 
which is where Parliament looks at the issue, asks the right 
questions and then says, well what we want; what we 
advise, our guidance is as follows.  And that is the 
persuasive power, the advisory power that Parliament has. 
 
On the other side of that equilibrium point is the 
slightly 
harder 
form 
of 
accountability, 
Executive 
accountability where Parliament says, we want you to do X 
and Y and we asked you to do X and Y you have not done 
10 
X and Y now we want to bring sanctions to bear on the 
situation.  That is very, very hard.  What are those 
sanctions available to Parliament because in the end there 
is nothing in the constitution that really permits sanction in 
those terms. 
 
Other than the very, very hard rock of hard nut to 
crack which is to bring a vote of no confidence and to 
essentially remove the government.  And that is a very 
drastic step.  
 
So what sanctions are available and I think in the 
20 
end there has to be about taking a stand to use Ms 
Rantho’s expression.  It has to be about the committee 
simple saying, we find the situation intolerable.  We will 
continue to call you back Minister week after week until 
you take action, until you get this right.  We will not 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 15 of 193 
 
approve budgets until you take the steps necessary to 
bring proper public financial management to bear on the 
situation and so on. 
 
In other words again borrowing from Ms Rantho’s 
evidence she said you need to have the oomph was her 
expression to do the necessary oversight work and that 
oomph is really where that equilibrium point is.  It is about 
a committee taking a stand, not tolerating lack of action or 
remedial action from Executive and really imposing its will 
as best it can. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:  And presumably when you talk about 
the committee you are talking also about the National 
Assembly which adopts the committees’ reports and to 
which really the committee is accountable. 
PROF CALLAND:  Well I suppose so but the problem I 
think with that proposition theoretically accurate and true 
that it is that the National Assembly becomes a very 
unwieldy instrument for that.   
 
Of course it does have its own mechanisms for 
accountability.  It has Parliamentary questions which I 
20 
think it is potentially the most useful device. 
 
Often those questions particularly from opposition 
MP’s fall into some kind of abbess because Ministers fail to 
answer them or answer them properly and then it depends 
on the system particularly through the leadership of the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 16 of 193 
 
National Assembly, the Speaker ensuring that the rules of 
the National Assembly are adhered to and that the 
Executive does properly account.  And then that takes us 
back then of course to political leadership, to the strength 
of that leadership and its independence and its own 
willingness to stand up to senior members of its own party. 
 
So we had a period of time I do not want to dwell on 
this, it is not perhaps usually relevant but there was a 
period of time when the Speaker of the National Assembly 
was also the Chairperson of the ruling party and presenting 
10 
to Mia a very clear conflict of interest. 
 
How 
on 
earth 
was 
she 
supposed 
to 
find 
an 
appropriate strike an appropriate balance between those 
two sets of responsibilities?  And I think that led her into 
some great difficulties.   
ADV FREUND SC:  Now I just want to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:  Pursue this particular line slightly 
further.  I do not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Freund. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Professor Calland with regard to the 
limits 
of 
what 
Parliament 
or 
a 
committee, 
Portfolio 
Committee may do when it is unhappy with the inaction of 
the Executive say a Minister or some actions of a Minister 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 17 of 193 
 
obviously it is quite clear that they cannot actually take 
over and do what belongs to the Executive domain.  But I 
think that – I think you and I agree that Mr Vincent Smith’s 
understanding of persuasion might not be enough to the 
extent that I understood him to talk about what I would 
think is kind of soft persuasion. 
 
Would you accept that Parliament should be able to 
pressurise the Executive without instructing them what to 
do?  Well what do you say about that?  Obviously the forms 
of pressure might differ and we can look at what would be 
10 
available to Parliament.  I think you have mentioned the 
idea that maybe Parliament might say well we will not 
approve your budget. 
PROF CALLAND:  So Chair  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
PROF CALLAND:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Could you hear me?  Did you hear me? 
PROF CALLAND:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you able to hear me? 
PROF CALLAND:  I did hear you – I heard you until the 
20 
very end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
PROF CALLAND:  In which I – so I could. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay alright. 
PROF CALLAND:  No I do not – I heard – Chair I heard the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 18 of 193 
 
question I just could not quite hear you at the end so I was 
not sure if you had finished the question.  My apologies for 
interrupting you but thank you for the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
PROF CALLAND:  I think it is – it might – if I may say so it 
is exactly one of the best and right questions to be asking 
and I indeed agree with you in respect of what Mr Smith 
said yesterday.  
 
He appeared to be saying that our power as 
Parliament is only or merely advisory.  All we can do is 
10 
offer advice and then we have to leave the stage, sit back 
and if the Executive does not take our advice so be it. 
 
I think that goes even further along that spectrum I 
was referring to.  It is south of soft accountability in the 
sense it is with respect superficial accountability because 
it 
is 
essentially 
saying 
we 
have 
no 
power 
in 
this 
relationship.  All we can do is advise and you know what 
you can call our bluff because if you do not do what we 
advise we are not going to take action. 
 
Now 
clearly 
if 
that 
is 
your 
attitude 
as 
a 
20 
Parliamentary committee or as an MP or as Parliament as a 
whole then all that will do I think is encourage the 
executive to think well Parliament is very weak and we can 
essentially do what we like. 
 
So taking a stand to once again adopt Mr Rantho’s 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 19 of 193 
 
neat phrase taking a stand means as you suggest Chair 
taking action that would be not instructions but would be 
sanctions which would be saying to Parliament – saying to 
the Executive excuse me if you do not take remedial 
action, if you do not change course in the way that we 
have suggested having conducted our oversight then there 
are 
consequences 
and 
those 
consequences 
may 
be 
budgetary, they may be that we pass new resolutions in the 
National Assembly and we may continue to call the Minister 
or the GG back before this committee every single week 
10 
until such time that we are satisfied that the Executive has 
listened to what we have to say and heeded what we have 
to say. 
 
After all the Executive is in a Parliamentary system 
such as South Africa’s.  The Executive is elected by the 
National Assembly.  The National Assembly elects the 
President.  The President then appoints his or her cabinet 
and the constitution makes it clear that the President and 
his or her cabinet are directly accountable to Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What about in quotes “reporting” such a 
20 
Minister to the President. I am saying in quotes.  So you 
have Parliament that is hugely dissatisfied with a Minister 
who maybe year in year out fails to correct a certain 
situation.  What about Parliament so to speak escalating 
the issue to the President and say, President in effect you 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 20 of 193 
 
were elected by this Parliament, Executive power rests 
primarily with you.  You choose your own cabinet, your own 
Ministers we are very unhappy with Minister so and so.  
This is what has happened. He or she is doing nothing, has 
done nothing over an extended period or is insisting on 
something that in our view is really totally untenable and 
that in that way then Parliament gives the President the 
opportunity either to talk sense to his or her Minister or 
replace him or to side with him and say, I actually think it 
is right.  So back off Parliament.  What do you think of – of 
10 
that?  I do not know – I do not think that Parliament does a 
lot of that at least publicly.  Maybe they do it privately. 
What do you think of that?  Do you think them it might work 
or what do you think? 
PROF CALLAND:  Chair thank you again for the question. 
The short answer the risk of being facetious as a 00:27:26 
which is to say it depends and I am afraid it depends I 
suspect very much on the character of the President 
involved. 
 
So will it be a President who takes seriously that 
20 
message that comes from Parliament or will it be a 
President who says, well I will ride that storm out, I have 
got a thick skin I control enough power within my party, the 
caucus is loyal to me, I have nothing to worry about 
politically, we recently won an election with a good 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 21 of 193 
 
majority, I will ride it out. 
 
Or will it be a President who says, no this is a very 
serious matter.  Parliament is the elected assembly 
representing the people.  It is taking a very dim view of the 
actions or inactions of several members of my cabinet that 
reflects poorly on my choice, my leadership and I am going 
to take action. 
 
But to break down my answer a little more I think 
there are three elements or three levels to perhaps 
thinking about how to strengthen Parliament’s capacity in 
10 
this regard. 
 
The first is the more technocratic element of 
tracking and monitoring oversight which we spoke about a 
little bit yesterday which found favour in two of the reports 
we referred to yesterday as being a technocratic element 
that is probably a necessary but not sufficient condition for 
good oversight.  So you track and monitor all of the 
oversight 
recommendations 
and 
advise 
you 
give 
as 
Parliament and maybe then secondly as a second level you 
need 
an 
institutional 
vehicle 
to 
gather 
all 
of 
those 
20 
recommendations together and I think one of the reports 
suggested having a – a sort of cross cutting oversight 
committee within Parliament that would receive all of those 
oversight 
recommendations 
track 
them 
and 
then 
communicate the success or otherwise of the Executive in 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 22 of 193 
 
responding to Parliament’s wishes and then to table an 
annual report or a six monthly report or whatever so that 
Parliament as a whole and the public most importantly can 
receive that information and act upon it. 
 
And then thirdly on your very point Chair one of 
the things that has always struck me as interesting is that 
while Parliament in the ‘90’s in that First Parliament as I 
said yesterday took this extraordinary and really positive 
step of setting up a series of Portfolio Committees.  A 
Portfolio 
Committee 
for 
every 
single 
government 
10 
department, to shadow the work of that particular ministry.  
What it did not do and has not ever done is to set up an 
equivalent Portfolio Committee for the President and the 
presidency.   
 
And I think that one of the things that that 
parliament in applying its mind to how to strengthen its 
oversight capacity, would be to think about establishing a 
committee whose sole objective is to look at the work of 
the presidency because a great of important executive 
work takes place within the presidency and to directly hold 
20 
the President to account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, in dealing with oversight 
matters and being dissatisfied with lack of action or lack of 
proper action on the part of the Executive on a number of 
members, Parliament would have to be alive to the fact 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 23 of 193 
 
that it must still be seen to respect the separation of 
powers but at the same time not be superficial in the 
execution of their oversight functions. 
 
It is a striking of that balance that might be 
difficult but the aim must be to strike the right balance.  
And of course, in the process, they would have to accept 
that there may be a number of matters where a Minister 
would disagree with their solution and have a different 
solution. 
 
And 
just 
because 
the 
Minister ’s 
solution 
is 
10 
different from theirs, it does not mean that they have got to 
try and push the Minister to adopt their solution.  Of 
course, sometimes somebody can say they are coming with 
a solution but actually you see it just going to make the 
situation worse.  [laughs] 
 
But where the Minister seeks to do something and 
there is difference of opinion between Parliament and the 
Executive as to what the Minister seeks to do will be 
effective, that might be a more difficult area to handle for 
Parliament, I would imagine, generally speaking. 
20 
 
Than a situation where a Minister is not doing 
anything or refuses point blank to do something.  So there 
the 
Parliament 
may 
have 
a 
stronger 
case, 
even 
to 
pressurise the Minister or even go to the President. 
 
And maybe the idea going to the President might 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 24 of 193 
 
not be necessary if one has regard to the rule of the 
Deputy President as leader of Government Business. 
 
Maybe if the matter is communicated to the Deputy 
President, that is sufficient because he or she can be 
expected to share the information to the President but at 
least he or she would be the Deputy President. 
 
But Parliament would have to choose in what 
circumstances they would say:  Look, we disagree with the 
Executive and let us leave it at that.  Allow the Executive 
what believes it will work.  We disagree but let us leave it 
10 
at that.  We will not pressurise.  We will not do anything.  
That is one category. 
 
Then there would be categories where they say:  
No, we should put some pressure.  And then it is a 
question of how much pressure.  And then there will be 
other categories where they say:  No, on these types of 
issues, we will put maximum pressure including escalating 
it to the President.  And whatever. 
 
So it seems to me that Parliament would need to 
so to speak pick-me-up-battles. And see which matters 
20 
deserve to be dealt with in what way.  What is your view on 
that? 
PROF CALLAND:   Well, I broadly and largely agree sir 
with your analyses Chair.  And in the end, although there is 
a good deal of technocracy and law in this.  These are 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 25 of 193 
 
political matters and in the end, politics being the art of 
the possible.   
 
You are right, Parliament would need to pick its 
battles.  And that then becomes of a question of judgment, 
political 
judgment 
of 
the 
chair 
of 
the 
committee 
in 
particular. 
 
And we have touched on it yesterday but did not 
really get into it but the role of the chair of the committee, 
and I think you have seen this from some of the evidence 
you have received, positive and negative, if I can say so, 
10 
in the last week.   
 
It shows how pivotal the chair is to whether or not 
the committee functions well and whether or not the 
committee is able to make the sort, though subtle, but very 
significant choices in political judgment.  You just decide 
Chair. 
 
And in the end, once again, I think that there will 
be occasions where the Minister is right and where the 
Minister is – and his or her staff in the department have 
more information available to have more resources. 
20 
 
So they are able to say to Parliament:  Well, thank 
you for that suggestion or thank you for those questions 
but we disagree for these reasons.   
 
And of course, when oversight works well it is a 
real conversation.  It is not superficial.  It is a profound 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 26 of 193 
 
conversation between branches of government.  Well, the 
then 
Chief 
Justice, 
Sandile 
Ngcobo 
describes 
as 
a 
dialogic, a dialogue between branches of the bylaw. 
 
But sadly, that kind of constructive bylaw has been 
conspicuous by its absence in much of the last decade, I 
would say, of Parliament’s life.  Growing through the 
2000’s but increasing markedly since 2009.  
 
So the scope for Parliament to really have that 
meaningful conversation with the Executive has been very 
rare.  And it does also takes us back to the resources 
10 
available to Parliament and its own willingness to get out 
and about as we discussed yesterday, to actually see for 
itself what is happening on the ground. 
 
Because if all the Parliamentary Committee does is 
sit in Cape Town and wait for the Executive to come to it, 
and if it does not have research resources in the search 
resources serving the committee, the chances are that the 
committee would not be in a position to second guess what 
the Executive says to it. 
 
And if the Executive says:  Well, that is a bad 
20 
idea.  We know better than you for these reasons.  Unless 
the committee has the with all and the knowledge and a 
political will to stand up to that, then the Executive will 
generally role over, the legislature.  And that oversight 
function will be, in a sense, will be crushed.   
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 27 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Calland, you will 
recall that although we are all interested in these issues in 
abstract but examining them in the present particular 
context of the Commission of Inquiry into alleged State 
Capture and alleged corruption at a high level. 
 
And I presume that when you said a moment ago 
that there are issues on which Parliament should, as it 
were, be differential and there are issues on which it 
should not. 
10 
 
But 
if 
there 
apparently 
credible 
or 
plausible 
allegations of corruption in State Capture that would fall in 
the end at which there would be a higher constitutional 
duty on the overseeing body to properly investigate. 
 
Would you agree with that? 
PROF CALLAND:   Yes, I would. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now there is a great deal in your report 
but I am very conscience of the time constraints.  And one 
of the features of your report is an analysis of the 
changing political culture in certain periods.  
20 
 
So if you could very briefly deal with that but the 
object being to come to try – ultimately to answer the 
question.  If it should be the case that Parliament failed in 
this instance to do what should have been done in respect 
of allegations of State Capture and corruption. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 28 of 193 
 
 
What in the political history and the political 
dynamics is of relevance in explaining and understanding 
that? 
PROF CALLAND:   So a number of factors are relevant.  I 
think the two that I would pick on today in my answer to 
your question Mr Freund would be firstly.  The political 
leadership and political climate and culture within the 
ruling party. 
 
And this is not necessarily a point that is specific 
to your specially made in respect of the ANC but inevitable 
10 
it is directed at the ANC because they have had the 
majority in every single Parliament since 1994. 
 
But many of the things that one could say about 
the political conundrum or dilemma that faces a ruling 
party in a parliamentary system where there is this overlap 
between the personnel in Parliament and personnel in the 
Executive arm of Government and Cabinet.   
 
You could say about probably most if not all 
majority parties around the world.  So it is not unique to 
the ANC.  I think Mr Selfe mentioned it in one of his 
20 
answers but several considerations would probably apply if 
the DA was in office or another opposition party was in 
government. 
 
But having said that.  The particular political 
climate and balance of forces to use the language that is 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 29 of 193 
 
often use within the ANC has mattered a great deal to the 
way that Parliament has been exercise its oversight. 
 
The second factor which we touched on earlier this 
morning was the quality calibre and political heft and cloud 
of the individual members of Parliament and particularly 
the committee chairs. 
 
Now take those two factors together and keep 
them in mind.  What one saw during the first Parliament 
was a high level of talent, political heft and cloud within 
the ANC ranks in Parliament. 
10 
 
So you would have backbenches who are now well-
known political figures.  Some of them in Cabinet who were 
chairs of committees and who strongly defined that role for 
their committees during the early part, during the 90’s 
during that first time. 
 
During the next two parliaments.  How can one put 
it?  And one must be careful with it because the Mbeki 
administration was of a really different character to what 
came later, the Zuma administration.  
 
But I do not think that President Mbeki, with all 
20 
due respect, that some of his political operators were huge 
enthusiasts for parliamentary oversight.  I do not think they 
welcomed it with open arms.  I think they found that a 
nuisance rather than something to be cherished. 
 
And I think it was partly because although the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 30 of 193 
 
early 2000’s were a time of relative economic prosperity 
pros and stability.  On the other hand, the administration 
was really having to wrestle with these deep, deep and 
difficult challenges of government. 
 
And as I said yesterday, government is difficult 
and you are bound to make mistakes.  There are bound to 
be a mire of failings and failures.  And Parliament’s job if it 
is doing it properly, will be to inevitable expose those 
failures, to ask questions that reveal them and which then 
direct attention as to how the Executive should do better. 
10 
 
So I think that during the 2000’s that was the 
prevailing rule and it became I think even more apparent 
during the window at the end of Mbeki’s time in government 
when he was removed by the change in political forces 
within the ANC.  He was compelled to resign in September 
of 2008.   
 
And 
there 
was 
this 
little 
window 
between 
September 2008 
and 
about 
a 
year 
later, 
September/October of 2009 when – I think there was a 
looseness to the political arrangements. 
20 
 
And I set the detail out of this in my report.  I will 
not dwell on it now.  It is not necessary, I do not think.  But 
what happened during that period was that Parliament was 
able to stretch its legs a little bit and it was able to get 
involved with the most important issues of the day in a way 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 31 of 193 
 
that perhaps been somewhat limited in the previous years. 
 
And to, I think, to a large extent it is because the 
new power brokers and powerful actors in the ANC were, in 
a sense, had taken their eyes off Parliament.  They had 
other concerns.   
 
For example, during that time, that I have just 
referred to, Thuli Madonsela was appointed by an ad-hoc 
committee 
of 
Parliament 
to 
become 
the 
new 
Public 
Protector, something that, no doubt, Mr Zuma and his close 
allies were later – were later to regret very deeply I would 
10 
think. 
 
So Parliament stretched its legs during that period 
but the truth of the matter is, the new Parliament the 3 r d 
Parliament in 2009 to 2014 really marked to see change.  
From there on, I think, Parliament became weaker and 
weaker until that moment in 2017 when, once again, the 
whims of change blew through the corridors of the ANC, 
the balance of forces shifted remarkable.   
 
And as Ms Rantho described very well, I think, 
reading, certainly, between the lines of her evidence.  
20 
Suddenly it became permissible to take the steps as a 
committee to begin to ask the real questions and to play 
the role of oversight in a much more meaningful way. 
 
And of course, one should not lose sight of the fact 
that the sequences of events is important there because 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 32 of 193 
 
Mr Gordhan and other fierce critics of President Zuma had 
been dismissed by some of his from his cabinet late at 
night on the 30 t h of March 2017. 
 
And it is no coincidence that two months later one 
sees the start of this process of that committee, at least, 
the Portfolio Committee of Public Enterprises, taking out 
its cajoles, taking up its responsibilities of the Constitution 
and taking a stand then having the Eskom Inquiry that you 
have heard about. 
 
And of course, the second fact that year that was 
10 
extremely relevant and I heard Deputy Chief Justice put 
this in a point to Ms Rantho although she could not 
particularly willing to accept it. 
 
But in my view, the fact of the matter was that the 
fact 
of 
a 
National 
Executive, 
the 
National 
Elective 
Conference of the ANC at the end of 2017 be on the 
horizon and knowing that there had been a real shift in the 
balance of power in the ANC, knowing that people were 
positioning 
themselves 
strongly 
to 
back 
a 
reformed 
candidate in the form of Cyril Ramaphosa, knowing that 
20 
there was a reasonable good chance that there will be a 
shift in power at the top of the ANC. 
 
Then, again, the cajoles that were controlling 
Parliament and the ANC caucus were loosened remarkable 
and people like Ms Rantho were able to being to do their 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 33 of 193 
 
job.  Too little too late, I would say strongly.   
 
Parliament failed in its duty in the preceding years.  
It was sleeping or it was deliberately asleep or it had been 
put to sleep on watch but it failed in its oversight and 
responsibilities.  I have no doubt of that.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, that is the very point that I 
wanted to take you to.  I appreciate the what you have 
sketched but of course a great deal of the work of this 
Commission concerns alleged offences in the period that 
you have described during which the cajoles controlling, as 
10 
it 
were, 
exercised 
the 
restraining 
influence 
on 
Parliamentary oversight. 
 
Let me just elaborate a little bit more in details.  
What is explains as you understand it, as it were, at the 
end of what you referred to in your pieces, the Prague 
Spring and up to the time that you have just described 
where in the middle of 2017 some light seems to shine in 
again on parliamentary oversight. 
PROF CALLAND:   What explained the positive, the 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   What explains the negatives that 
preceded that?   
PROF CALLAND:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   That you say was the failure. 
PROF CALLAND:   Well, it was a failure of political 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 34 of 193 
 
leadership.  So it was a failure by the political leadership 
of the ANC to take Parliament seriously and it was – and 
one of the many examples that one can bring to bear, it 
would have been – and deal with this of many cases in my 
report.  The Nkandla matter.   
 
So the Public Protector ’s report comes before 
Parliament.  Instead of taking it seriously and do what the 
Constitutional Court later said it should have done which 
was to support as it is constitutionally required to support 
the Public Protector, attracting the body, in ensuring that 
10 
the Executive heeded the remedial action but the Public 
Protector report steps should have been taken instead of 
which the majority party put down and shut it and point 
blank refused to do so.  
 
It took a highly adversarial position in respect of 
the Nkandla report from the Public Protector.  An ad-hoc 
committee was set up and in a remarkable display of unity, 
the like of which I do not think I have ever seen of 
watching Parliament, the opposition parties on bank, all of 
them together walked out from that process because they 
20 
recognised it to be what it was, a major and grave 
usurpation or failure on part of the majority party to 
respect their constitutional duty. 
 
It was a very cynical act and it does not matter 
who in particular the actors were.  I am not going to name 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 35 of 193 
 
them.  But they were, for whatever reason, you would have 
to ask them, they felt beholden to the leadership of the 
ANC at that time, Mr Zuma.   
 
They felt required to remain loyal to him and they 
were doing his bidding in terms of preventing Parliament 
from doing its job. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Now I want to start drawing to 
a conclusion and you deal with this from page 30 of your 
report in the bundle and I see that you highlight in the 
middle of page 30 in bold print, probably in bold print the 
10 
entire report, what you see to be the primary challenge.  If 
you can then just deal with that, please. 
PROF CALLAND:   So the word that I use in my report 
which is the conclusions and recommendations is the word 
insulate.   
 
So throughout my time watching Parliament and 
watching 
politics 
in 
general 
what 
strikes 
me 
is 
the 
inevitable is that members of Parliament who stand up to 
the 
leadership 
of 
their 
own 
party 
will 
always 
face 
pushback.  That is the nature of politics. 
20 
 
So the question is how can one as an institution 
find ways to insulate that individual from those pressure 
points so that they can continue to press on do what is 
required of them and to honour their responsibilities under 
the Constitution. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 36 of 193 
 
 
And there is a range of answers to that.  We have 
traversed quite a few of them already in my evidence but 
they range from taking practical solutions within the rules 
of Parliament, the system of Parliament.  It becomes an 
issue of training, which by the way, I think should include 
ethics training.   
 
Before I forget I have to mention that I spoke to a 
very senior ANC member, a former member of Parliament, 
last week who persuaded me that ethics training in general 
but perhaps training related to oversight functions in 
10 
particular should be legislated. 
 
And if I can come back Mr Freund briefly to what 
we have discussed yesterday in relation to the Corder 
Report and Professor Corder ’s recommendations that there 
that legislation should prescribe the oversight function and 
how it should be carried out. 
 
As I said yesterday, the time is probably not right 
for that legislation back in the early 2000’s.  I think it was 
a good argument by which I accepted it at the time that the 
better course is to try and create the convention of 
20 
practice of accountability as a form of insulation. 
 
Because if the convention is the backbench MP’s 
can and should ask difficult questions for MP’s and not 
suffer career limiting consequences as a result.  And that 
convention is one form of insulation. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 37 of 193 
 
 
But if that convention in practise is not present 
and it has not been present and has not been created, then 
maybe we do need to return to the Corder idea of 
legislation that would require as a matter of law MP’s to do 
certain things in performing that oversight function. 
 
And then of course, the – as I said the culture and 
climate within the institution, within the ruling party 
matters tremendously.   
 
So all of the money in the world, all of the 
investments and time, energy and resources to fix rules, to 
10 
create systems.  All of that would count, I suspect very 
little 
unless 
the 
leadership 
is 
one 
that 
says 
it 
is 
permissible to ask difficult questions. 
 
It is permissible to take a stand.  In fact, we 
welcome that and you will not only not suffer negative 
consequences 
but 
you 
will 
celebrated 
as 
a 
MP 
of 
excellence, of quality, somebody is deserving of the nation 
and is doing the right thing for the country and for the 
political process. 
 
Of course, there is a touch on naivety, I suspect, 
20 
in that proposition and in which case I plead guilty but in 
the end it requires leadership to give that political space to 
people to take that sort of stand. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And you touch very briefly yesterday 
and you touch again briefly at this point of your report on 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 38 of 193 
 
the reform of the electorate system.  Just in short, as I 
understand it, you believe that the time has come to relook 
at the recommendations of the by the Commission, not as a 
- but as a part of a reformed package. 
PROF CALLAND:   Yes, I do.  Some people regard 
electorate form as a – I think see it as a silver bullet that 
will solve many of our political problems.  I do not see it in 
that way.   
 
I am seeing the opposite political system or 
electorate system, I should say, in the United Kingdom 
10 
when I was a young professional, a young political activist. 
 
I saw it there.  It has certain advantages.  It also, 
by the way, comes with certain disadvantages such as the 
unfairness, you know, in a purely first class pro-system 
where is no proportional representation. 
 
But the think the report is notable because it 
seems – it seeks to strike a balance between the principle 
of proportionality and proportionate representation in the 
Constitution 
and 
the 
upside 
that 
comes 
from 
direct 
constituency representation. 
20 
 
And 
as 
I 
described 
yesterday 
from 
my 
own 
experience with the British constituency system.  What a 
constituency system can do is help provide the individual 
member of Parliament with some degree with insulation 
because he or she can say to the chief whip, can say to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 39 of 193 
 
the party leadership:  Yes, of course I agree with you.  Yes, 
of 
course 
I 
want 
to 
remain 
loyal 
but 
back 
in 
my 
constituency people are unhappy about this. 
 
They are unhappy about the state of schools, 
public 
service 
delivery 
or 
whatever. 
 And 
they 
are 
requiring, they are demanding that I take a stand in 
Parliament and if I do not do that, they will probably 
choose somebody else to represent them next time and 
indeed we even may lose the seat. 
 
Now that political process an individual MP with 
10 
some degree of political insulation and I think it is why it is 
high time that the Van Zyl Slabbert Report is brought out of 
the dusty drawer where it sits.  It is given proper 
consideration. 
 
Of 
course, 
the 
New 
Nation 
decision 
of 
the 
Constitutional Court require Parliament to consider how 
best to change the law to permit independent candidates to 
stand, is perhaps the hook and the ideal timing in a sense 
for that review of the electorate system as a whole. 
 
And that in turn would allow Parliament to revoke 
20 
Section 37(3)(c), the one we had discussed.  This, I think 
really, problematic provision which really – not so much 
chills, but sends a vast icicle through the institution of 
Parliament in terms of limiting the scope, the political 
space that individual MP’s may have to take a stand 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 40 of 193 
 
against their own party and their own seniors and the 
Executive. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I understood you to be stressing 
the importance of political culture particularly within a 
majority party.  The importance of leadership and the 
stance it adopts visa vie the question of oversight. 
 
But you do an addition under the section that you 
call the rules of engagement and broadly speaking, would 
it be correct to say that you are encouraging the relooking 
of the Van Zyl Slabbert Report, the OVAC Report], the 
10 
rules revision. 
 
You feel that there is a room for Parliament itself 
perhaps to reconsider the adequacy of its institutional 
arrangements as regards to oversight? 
PROF CALLAND:   Yes, and I choice this Mr Freund in my 
– not to go through the OVAC report and independent 
channel(?) reports and cherry pick what I thought was the 
best recommendations.   
 
I think that requires a much more considered 
review by Parliament itself.  Parliament, if it is serious 
20 
about remedy their failures and is serious about ensuring 
there is no repeat of its failure with regard to State 
Capture, it has to look at this, it has to take all of those 
reports seriously and it then has to come up with a new 
package, a new system within the institution to strengthen 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 41 of 193 
 
its hand and to enable to play its role more effectively. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Professor Calland, there is a great 
deal more material in your report but I am watching the 
clock.  I have now taken the hour that was allocated.  And 
perhaps let me just ask you one general question and that 
is this. 
 
What would you say is your core message and your 
core argument? 
PROF CALLAND:   So, I guess my core point is that we 
need to find a way to insulate parliamentary committees 
10 
and the members of parliamentary committees particularly 
in the majority party to give them political space, the 
institutional space to do what the Constitution requires of 
them. 
 
That requires, no doubt, some tinkering with the 
system of Parliament, with the rules, with capacity, with 
resources, with training.  All of those things. 
 
But this is not a technocratic fix.  This requires a 
wholesale 
review 
of 
the 
whole 
system 
including 
the 
electorate system.  This is not, in cryptic terms, about 
20 
replacing the off spinner with a leg spin.   
 
This is about looking at who the captain is, who 
the coach is, the culture within the team, the selection 
process, youth development, training, preparation.  The 
whole package. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 42 of 193 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, perhaps if we change some of our 
spinners we would not have been where we are in 
Pakistan.  Mr Chairman, that is as far as I want to take it.  
I do not know whether from the Chair whether there are 
further issues that you would like to raise with Professor 
Calland. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Professor Calland really what one 
is trying to do here is to think about protection of members 
of 
Parliament 
from 
any 
adverse 
consequences 
for 
genuinely performing their oversight functions or...   
10 
 
Ja, that is what one is doing.  You use the term 
insulation.  That is fine as well.  But I suspect that one 
could have a law that says no party may prejudice or 
discipline of Parliament or performing its – or his or her 
oversight functions but you may have a situation which is 
different from what Dr Makhosi Khoza told me where she 
said well, charges were brought against me by the ruling 
party for voting in support of the motion of no confidence 
even 
though 
the 
Speaker 
had 
assured 
members 
of 
parliament that there would be no adverse consequences 
20 
and even though the judgment of the Constitutional Court 
seemed to say if there is a conflict between a member ’s 
loyalty to his or her party and his or her loyalty to the 
Republic then the loyalty to the public should prevail but 
charges were brought against her that, as I understood her 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 43 of 193 
 
evidence, unashamedly were about the fact that she had 
voted in favour of the motion of no confidence.  A number 
of – in many cases it might not happen like that, in many 
cases it may be that a member who is performing his or her 
oversight functions too well, if I can put it that way, too 
well, for the ruling party or a ruling party might be 
managed out of parliament without her exit from parliament 
being said by the ruling party to be in any way connected 
with how she or he has performed his or her oversight 
functions but in the end people would get to know that, you 
10 
know, if you look at what has happened over the past x 
number of years people who have acted in a certain way 
have somehow found themselves not coming back to 
parliament or something like that. 
 
What can be done to either encourage a ruling party 
or a ruling party, any ruling party in the future either 
encourage them to allow their members of parliament to 
perform their oversight functions the way they should or 
what can be recommended or put in place that would 
discourage a ruling party or any ruling party in the future 
20 
from taking adverse decisions against or having a negative 
attitude towards member of parliament, its member of 
parliament who seek to do really nothing more than do the 
job that they are there to do as parliament to the best of 
their ability?  Do you have any ideas in terms of what can 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 44 of 193 
 
be used as incentives for the ruling party or any ruling 
party to not to act against people who do their job or just 
something that could act as a disincentive? 
PROF CALLAND:   Chair, thank you.  I probably pulled my 
punches somewhat earlier when I answered Mr Freund’s 
question about the shift in the prevailing climate in the fifth 
parliament from 2009 onwards.  There is no doubt that 
there was throughout the body politic and the ruling party a 
climate of fear.  I experienced many occasions where 
individual 
members 
of 
parliament 
expressed 
- 
ANC 
10 
members of parliament expressed that to me, people I had 
known for a long time who were anxious about even talking 
to me, who refused to discuss matters on cell phone, who, 
when one met them for tea, removed the battery of their 
cell phone .  I do not want to be melodramatic about it but 
the point is that during that period it became increasingly 
difficult even for thick-skinned, experienced politically 
savvy politicians within the ruling party to operate in a way 
that even begun to suggest that they were taking a stand 
or resisting the leadership and in any way threatening the 
20 
new political economy that was building up around the 
President of the ANC.   
There were huge stakes involved and of course this 
Commission is focused on those and I think in answering 
your question what can be done, the first thing that can be 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 45 of 193 
 
done, because I have no doubt that the report of this 
Commission will be one of the most important documents in 
the life, the first hundred years of this new democracy 
because it will, I have no doubt, examine the institutional 
failures that allowed state capture to take its hold on the 
body politic and to threaten the constitutional democracy 
and continues to do so. 
So what this Commission in its final report says 
about this topic I think will be very important, will carry 
weight.  In itself it will help remind everybody of the 
10 
responsibilities of MPs and to remind to remind the 
political leadership of this country that no individual MP 
should ever suffer negative consequences or reprises as a 
result of having asked the right questions taken a stand 
and stood up against wrongdoing or against inept conduct 
by the executive. 
Secondly, I think legislation prescribes the way in 
which oversight is performed, may help to some extent, it 
may at least provide a safety blanket for an individual to 
say well, I am doing what the law requires of me.  Of 
20 
course, in a sense the constitution already does that, but 
legislation that sets out as [indistinct] 07.07 sought to do, 
the detail of that oversight function could prove to be 
useful. 
Ultimately, 
though, 
Chair, 
I 
am 
afraid 
it 
is 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 46 of 193 
 
dependent upon the good leadership of a political party 
and a political system to take that stand and to actively 
demonstrate and showcase that when an individual does 
the right thing, speaks out, takes the stand, that he or she 
will be rewarded.  Too often in the past, and Ms Rantho is 
of course a good example, having too late in the day 
perhaps but having finally done her job as Chair as the 
Public Enterprises committee from mid-2017 onwards, her 
reward was be removed from parliament whereas others, 
some of whom have been very gravely implicated by 
10 
evidence in this Commission, came back to parliament, not 
only came back to parliament but found themselves as 
chairs of committee in the new parliament and that sends 
completely the wrong message out and I think it is 
something, if I may say so, that this Commission should 
not and comment on and recognise that it was extremely 
unhelpful.  What that does is cementing the ideas in the 
minds of MPs the idea that such behaviour will not be well 
taken by the leadership, it will in fact be career-limiting, to 
use the euphemism. 
20 
And lastly, fourthly, I think back to the electoral 
system there is no doubt that individually elected, directly 
elected members of parliaments will have more strength, 
they will have the legitimacy and the direct power that 
comes from direct election or gives them a little bit more 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 47 of 193 
 
political muscle in find a new balance between the 
executive and the legislature.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there merit in – would there be merit 
in considering the possibility of creating room for a 
member of parliament who is able to say that the only 
reason why I have been managed out or dismissed – 
maybe, you know, managed out, the only reason why I 
have been managed out of parliament is – or not been 
brought back, is either solely or dominantly because I have 
sought to ensure that I do my job as a member of 
10 
parliament in terms of parliamentary oversight properly.  Is 
there any – would there be any merit in thinking about 
whether there should be a possibility of a member of 
parliament who can show that to be – to have the 
possibility of being granted some monetary compensation.  
I mean, if – and, of course, if one is thinking about that, 
the next thing is who must pay, you know?  And maybe the 
party that manages him or her out must pay so that over 
time it can realise that there is cost to managing people 
out of parliament just because they are doing their job 
20 
properly, you know?   
Because for many MPs, I would imagine, who may 
wanting to do the right thing but see the threat of losing 
their job as MPs and not any alternative or viable 
alternative.  The one thing that would be uppermost in their 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 48 of 193 
 
minds is I will not be able to put bread on the table for my 
family, what about my children at school and whatever, 
whatever, but maybe, just maybe, if they know that well, I 
am not assured of compensation but there is a forum and 
there is a possibility and I think I can improve my case that 
in terms of performance I have really done nothing wrong 
other than that was is considered to be wrong by my party 
is proper performance of my duties as a member of 
parliament.   Is there – would there be any merit in 
considering whether something like that should be even 
10 
thought? 
PROF CALLAND:   Chair, although I respect the sentiment 
that lies behind your thought, I am afraid I do not see merit 
in it, I see only problem in terms of both the law and the 
politics of it.  Causation would be just one of many I think 
challenges.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  
PROF CALLAND:   In the end we represent a – I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, continue. 
PROF CALLAND:   In the event – forgive me DCJ, I am 
20 
sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am sorry please go ahead. 
PROF CALLAND:   Well, I am simply going to say in the 
end who is chosen to represent a political party is an 
innately inherently a political choice for that political party 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 49 of 193 
 
and in the end for stronger safeguard in relation to poor 
choices in that regard is through the election process 
where the electorate decide whether or not a wise choice 
was made and I think the institutional answer to your 
question maybe in the form of that tracking and monitoring 
system earlier and the ability of committees to publish 
reports that are strong in terms of saying we took a stand, 
we asked the executives y, x and z, it has not responded in 
the way that it should have done, here is our report and 
signed by the members of that committee and then that 
10 
report has to be the testimony, as it were, the legacy of 
that piece of work by that committee and the electorate 
and the media and social civil society observers can then 
see that, see parliament has done its job and then in the 
political discourse that should wash through and be 
weighed in the balance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess part of your answer maybe takes 
one to the proposition that whatever one does with regard 
to the issue of parliamentary oversight and what a ruling 
party might do or might not do and so on, somewhere one 
20 
has got to say the electorate, the voters must take a view 
of how every political party is doing, what they are doing 
and, so to speak, punish it if it is doing something that the 
electorate disapproves of and that is one of the things that 
must be taken into account, namely we cannot provide 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 50 of 193 
 
concrete solutions for all problems that are, you know, 
guaranteed to work but also we must – because remember 
that this is politics, this is a political area and the voters, 
you know, have a very important role.  If they disapprove 
of something that a political party is doing, if they – when 
they want to show their disapproval they do and so maybe 
in a way part of what that says is we must just, whatever 
we do, we must maybe not be too ambitious and we must 
accept that there are certain things that just cannot be 
guaranteed. 
10 
PROF CALLAND:   Yes, I agree, Chair, there are certain 
things where a law can possibly have a positive impact or 
not rule, I should say, can have a positive impact because 
the choices would have been made, the issues that are in 
on the table are inherently political.  Where it comes to the 
question of the electorate, I agree with you that the issue 
must be to what extent is the electorate able through the 
information available to it to make an informed considered 
judgment about the performance of the people that it has 
elected and one of the defects I would argue of the current 
20 
system is because of the list system and the control of the 
list system by political parties and their leadership.   
The electorate has almost no say in who is on that 
list and therefore has a very difficult choice to make 
election time choosing just between parties. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 51 of 193 
 
 
Even if having looked at the list it is unhappy with 
the fact that certain individuals may be on that list.  The 
direct representation and again I caution, it is not the 
solution 
to 
everything, 
but 
it 
at 
least 
provides 
the 
electorate with the knowledge of who it has chosen, an 
individual that it can name, see and directly hold to 
account and that in individual, in theory at least, and often 
in practice from my experience, the electorate will then 
hold that individual directly to account making sure that he 
or she raises the issues in parliament that that community 
10 
and that geographically contained constituency want him or 
her to raise in parliament and that, I think, would be an 
improvement or could be a significant improvement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think one can say based on your 
evidence and maybe the evidence of others that this is not 
a situation where one can come up with one proposal to 
say this is what needs to be changed and that fixes the 
whole problem, it is a situation where probably a number of 
things might need to be done, each one of which is not on 
its own enough but it contributes, to a certain degree, to 
20 
changing the situation.  I mean, you have made the point 
that the constituency system is not a panacea but it has a 
role to play and then I think – I think you may have said 
yes but maybe another witness said this to say well, 
certainly Ms Mazzone, I think, that there may be a need for 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 52 of 193 
 
certain portfolio committees to be chaired by a member of 
parliament who does not belong to the majority party.  That 
is one. 
 
Of course, when one looks at SCOPA which has 
been chaired by member of parliament who does not 
belong to the ruling party, its check record appears to be 
that it is doing very well or it has done very well over the 
years.  There may be different views of success but there 
seems to be some consensus that, you know, it has done 
reasonably well compared to some portfolio committees 
10 
and when Mr Godi was giving evidence I asked him what he 
attributed that to, you know, then he told me about how he, 
as Chairperson, you know, made a decision to go out of his 
way to try and get the committee to work as a team.   
 
So it may be that one, the fact that it is somebody 
from a different political party has something to contribute 
plus the personality and leadership skills of a particular 
individual – but you may have mentioned other possible 
measures as well.  
PROF CALLAND:   Mr Chair, thank you, I think you are 
20 
right, I agree with your initial point, your analysis, and you 
ended up by speaking of the role of the committee chair, I 
would submit that the role of the committee chair is pivotal, 
it is perhaps the most important set of positions in the 
whole of parliament bar the Speaker.   
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 53 of 193 
 
The quality, calibre independence and leadership 
skills of the committee chairs determines almost 90%, I 
would say, of whether that committee is able to function 
effectively and do its job under the constitution and so, in 
some respects, it does not matter whether that chair is an 
opposition or ANC or ruling party chair, what matters is 
whether they have those skills. 
Often the membership of the committee will matter 
a lot, so I saw some committees, most effective over the 
years were the ones were the membership of the committee 
10 
was very consistent over a long period of time, so the 
Justice meeting, for example, Justice and Constitutional 
Affairs committee was one of the best committees in 
parliament for a very long time over several parliaments 
because although it had a very robust ANC chair, he had 
leadership skills and he was willing to listen to the 
opposition and the opposition and ANC benches were able 
to operate as a team with a level of trust and respect that 
ensured that yes, the ANC’s majority was respected and 
understood, as it needs to be, they have the majority and 
20 
we should not ever lose sight of that. 
So 
I 
am 
very 
careful 
to 
reach 
for 
counter 
majoritarian fixes, fixes that actually in a sense fail to 
recognise or respect the fact that one party has won a 
majority at an election.  We should be very careful of that. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 54 of 193 
 
What we need to do is find institutional solutions 
and remedies that strengthen the ability of majority party 
members in parliament to honour their duties under the 
constitution, as I have said, and to take a stand where 
necessary against more senior members of their own party.  
That is the nub of this. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Thank 
you 
very 
much, 
Professor 
Calland, I do not know, Mr Freund, whether there is 
anything arising that you would like to ask? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, if I might. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Professor, there is just an issue that I 
think is not brought to the fore although I know Professor 
Calland would be sensitive to it, so I would just like to 
bring to the fore.  The question of party discipline and the 
legitimacy of party discipline is a factor that I think you 
recognise, am I correct, Professor Calland, and the 
discussion that we are having is not about the subversion 
of that principle but rather about recognising that there 
must 
be 
scope 
for 
an 
exception 
if 
fairly 
limited 
20 
circumstances against pressure from a political party, from 
a member of parliament, not to follow conscience, not to 
follow constitutional values but I just want your commend 
on the legitimacy of party discipline particularly in the 
context of a PR list system constitution that we have and 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 55 of 193 
 
just to indicate that you are sensitive to this issue and 
what its implications are. 
PROF CALLAND:   Mr Freund, I am sorry, you cut out right 
at the beginning of your question.  What was the principle 
that you are referring to? 
ADV FREUND SC:   The principle is that I understand that 
you are aware of and I think that you also accept the 
legitimacy of, the core principle of party discipline in our 
system but I am putting to you that even though that is the 
case, 
we 
are 
really 
arguing 
that 
in 
certain 
limited 
10 
circumstances some type of exception must be recognised 
to protect the bona fide MP following conscience and 
particularly when there is this conflict between conscience 
- 
constitutional 
values 
on 
the 
one 
hand 
and 
party 
instructions on the other hand.  If we could just get a 
comment on that? 
PROF CALLAND:   Well, of course, political parties can 
only be effective political creatures if there is a sufficient 
discipline within them, they require a level of discipline 
otherwise they fall apart and parties that fall – that are ill-
20 
disciplined rarely succeed and so the desire of party 
political bosses and managers to instil a sense of loyalty 
and discipline is not only unavoidable but probably entirely 
appropriate. 
 
What is not appropriate is where an individual 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 56 of 193 
 
member of parliament is put under pressure, legal or 
illegal, 
where 
they 
are 
intimidated, 
where 
they 
are 
threatened and where they are pushed into a position 
where they feel they cannot raise an issue even though it 
may be an issue of great significance and importance such 
as corruption, such as maladministration, such as gross 
negligence or incompetency in the state and if they are in 
a position where they feel they cannot raise those issues, 
either within the ANC, within the ruling party or in 
parliament then of course that, I would argue, if a failure of 
10 
leadership, a failure of political culture and so when I think 
it was sent by senior members of the ANC after one of the 
no confidence votes that individual MPs who had voted 
against 
President 
Zuma 
would 
be 
sought 
out 
and 
disciplined, then of course that is a problem. 
 
Where you a maverick MP who decides to dishonour 
the political manifesto, policy manifesto and ambitions of a 
ruling party, if he or she then steps out of line they must 
accept the consequences, but that is an entirely different 
proposition, it is an entirely different situation.  I hope that 
20 
helps. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Professor Calland, 
thank you for coming, availing yourself to assist the 
Commission, we appreciate it very much. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 57 of 193 
 
PROF CALLAND:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will now excuse you and if we need to 
ask you to supplement your submission and deal with 
certain questions I am sure if we approach you, you will 
make time for it. 
PROF CALLAND:   Very well.  Thank you very much 
indeed, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you are excused. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you.  Chair, I presume at this 
stage I too shall be excused and I will leave you to matter 
10 
related to Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is what we will do and it is 
eleven o’clock so I think I will take the tea adjournment 
now.  That will give them the work stream team time to set 
up and then thereafter when we resume we will then 
continue.  So you are also excused, Mr Freund. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Morning, Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am alive to the fact that we have eaten 
20 
a lot into your time.  We will do the best we can to 
compensate you for it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, in order, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, if I take the tea adjournment now 
and we resume at quarter past eleven will that give you 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 58 of 193 
 
enough time to set up or should I add more time? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Until twenty past, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Twenty past? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Twenty past, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright, we will take the tea 
adjournment now.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning once again Mr Seleka, 
good morning everybody. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are ready Chairperson.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta is our next witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:   Good morning sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   You will have to administer 
the oath or affirmation again because of the lapse of time, 
registrar please administer the oath or affirmation. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
DR NTETA:   Ayanda Komotso Lindiwe Nteta. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR NTETA:   I do not. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 59 of 193 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
DR NTETA:    I do. 
REGISTRAR:    Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so 
help me God. 
DR NTETA:   So help me God. 
AYANDA 
KOMOTSO 
LINDIWE 
NTETA: 
[duly 
sworn, 
states] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may then proceed Mr 
Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Dr Nteta, you 
can you hear me clearly? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I can hear you clearly, thank you.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Just by way of introduction 
to Dr Nteta’s evidence Chairperson or continuation of the 
evidence…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, if you can just help the public to 
remember what we were dealing with and where we left off 
20 
and what you seek to cover with her evidence as well as 
with the evidence of other witnesses of the work, Eskom 
work stream district. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay thank you Chair.  The Eskom 
work stream let me start with that one Chairperson.  The 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 60 of 193 
 
Eskom work stream this week is scheduled to present 
evidence over a period of three days from today, tomorrow, 
and Thursday.  
Dr Nteta is the first of the six witnesses who will be 
testifying on the Eskom work stream this week.  We will 
have Ms Venete Klein after Ms Nteta, Dr Nteta.  Tomorrow 
we have Dr Pat Naidoo and Ms Viroshini Naidoo and on 
Thursday, we are scheduled to be lead the evidence of Mr 
Mark Pamensky and if time permits Chairperson Ms 
Suzanne Daniels as well.  Starting with today's witness, Dr 
10 
Nteta is a former employee of Eskom.  She was in the 
department or division called fuel sourcing as a senior 
manager in that division.  She has testified previously 
about a couple of aspects which include her interaction 
with Mr Tony Gupta, her involvement in the Brakfontein 
contract that was concluded between Eskom and Tegeta. 
And today, she will go into the details of the 
submission that was prepared in regard to the R659million 
pre-payment.  We had started with it but we could not 
finish because we had Mr Molefe that came to testify last 
20 
time.  Dr Nteta you had followed; you have followed that 
introduction? 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chairperson the bundle we are 
using is Eskom Bundle 14, one four, Dr Nteta’s affidavit is 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 61 of 193 
 
found in Exhibit U28. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is or her affidavit is actually should be 
Exhibit U28.1. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has been admitted as Exhibit U28.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what page were we on when 
you…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are on page 71. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair, my microphone is too 
loud in my ears Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I said, my microphone is too loud on 
my ears but I suppose it is meant to assist for Dr Nteta to 
hear me.  Dr Nteta you can hear me? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I can hear you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you I think they have 
adjusted it so I can hear myself.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta we are going to lead your 
evidence on what is or what was a submission made to the 
Board, the Board Tender Committee in April 2016.  That 
submission motivated for a pre-payment decision by the 
BTC of an amount of R659million to Tegeta.  We can see 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 62 of 193 
 
from your affidavit and the brief testimony you gave last 
time that you took part in the drafting of that submission. 
I would like you to explain to the Chairperson, how 
did the drafting of that submission come about?  In other 
words, go to the beginning of what caused the drafting of 
the submission to be made.  So just as you start, 
remember that we are, from a time point of view, we are on 
the 8 t h of April 2016 and you are going to take us through 
either to before that and going forward after the 8 t h of April 
2016. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry before Dr Nteta says, is the 
submission you are talking about Mr Seleka the one that is 
referred to at page 73, that heading preparation of the 
submission to the Board Tender Committee.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, it is thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you can just tell me where I find it. 
DR NTETA:   May I commence? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No just one second Mr Seleka is still 
trying to answer my question or you can take me to the 
page where the submission appears. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay Chairperson, but in terms of the 
affidavit, I mean, in terms of the evidence Chair I am still 
in the affidavit, the submission…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just be careful not to speak too far away 
from the mic. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 63 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, page 190 Chairperson, one nine 
zero, or Chair were you asking about in her affidavit where 
she is dealing with it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think your question you asked her 
I think to tell me how a certain submission was, how it 
came about that it was heard and so on.  So, and then I 
looked at the affidavit to see where that is then I saw that 
heading but I think that what you have just told me means 
that you are asking about the submission that appears at 
page 190. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One nine zero, that is correct 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, in the affidavit is it dealt with 
somewhere just so that I can link the two but if it is not it 
is okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No it is Chair.  She will - she deals 
with the draft from paragraph 8.2 onwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe paragraphs 8.2 to 8.11 is 
how it came about and then 8.12 and following is the 
actual preparation. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, for instance Chair on page 74 of 
her affidavit paragraph 8.18.  The submission she is 
referring to, the last paragraph which is an exchange 
between herself and Ms Daniels.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, 8.19 she says: 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 64 of 193 
 
“While preparing the submission documents to be I 
realised that.” 
Blah, blah, blah, blah.  Okay no, that is fine.  Let us - but 
at least you are talking about the document that starts at 
page one nine zero. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Dr Nteta if you still remember the 
question, you can go ahead and answer.  If, in the 
meantime, with all the questions from me you have lost 
track of the question then Mr Seleka can repeat it. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chairperson maybe what I 
should do for the Chairperson is to refer the Chairperson 
to the signed submission.  That is in the Tegeta reference 
bundle because what Dr Nteta is going to testify about is 
how the submission was drafted but she did not touch the 
signed one.  So the signed one it is in the Tegeta reference 
bundle, which is Eskom Bundle 18, one eight and that is 
on, I think it is 18, 18A Chairperson on page 292. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Is that the same document 
as the one at page 190 in the other bundle but the 
20 
difference is that this one is signed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, the one on page 90, it's a 
draft, it ends up being that is the final version of the draft. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the final, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So they will not be exactly the same. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 65 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It just shows you the evolution of the 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  But at this stage, you are 
asking about the one at 190? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   How she drafted it, how it came about.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I guess you might wish to just 
repeat your question. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. Dr Nteta, if I may repeat the 
question.  I was saying having started with the evidence 
regarding the Board's the submission to the Board for a 
pre-payment of R659million, could you please explain to 
the Chairperson, how the drafting of that submission came 
about?  And from a timing point of view, we are on the 8 t h 
of April 2016 you can take the Chairperson to the events 
prior to the 8 t h of April 2016 and onwards. 
DR NTETA:   Thank you.  So with regards to the drafting of 
the submissions that went to the Board of 11 t h April 2016.  
20 
I am going to take you to before the 8 t h of April and in fact, 
what I would also like to do before I start is also just refer 
to – I am going to give a few definitions because I am 
going to assume that when I do talk I am going to be using 
– I am going to say Eskom language.  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 66 of 193 
 
So I am going to be referring to the procurement 
procedure which we call the 3210/34.  And this is was 
available in Mr Mabelane’s affidavit where he talks about 
the different roles in terms of people within procurement 
and within the organisation and he speaks specifically in 
reference to the document.  
The roles of, for example, the group executive for 
group technology, the divisional executive for primary 
energy, he speaks of a cost centre manager and end user 
and the procurement. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I would like you to tell the Chairperson 
even before that, when you are approached by Mr Ravindra 
Nath of Tegeta because I think that is where the whole 
story starts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think before we…[intervene] 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I am getting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before Dr Nteta your mic is too far 
away from you, Mr Seleka yes so I could not hear for 
20 
example, the name of somebody you mentioned in what you 
were saying to Dr Nteta. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is Mr Ravindra Nath.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Dr Nteta.  
DR NTETA:   Okay.  So, prior to the 8 t h of April, Mr 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 67 of 193 
 
Ravindra Nath who is the CEO of Tegeta had approached 
me and indicated to me that they have an ability to provide 
us with coal for some several months.  He had approached 
me because they currently had a contract with Eskom for 
the similar supply and that particular contract was due to 
end around the 13 t h to the 15 t h of April, by them providing 
all the coal that is required.  
So I would say approximately end of March, in that 
period, he then approached me and said that he had coal 
to offer and we engaged in terms of that particular coal to 
10 
offer. And subsequent - and I am going to say perhaps 
there may be one or two engagements that happened in 
that time but I cannot be sure of the exact number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:   Leading up to around…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  When he said he had coal to 
offer was he speaking in the context of seeking an 
extension of the contract that was about to expire or was 
he talking about a different contract that he had in mind, if 
you were interested in his coal? 
20 
DR NTETA:   Chairperson it is difficult to say because we 
actually just would assume it is similar coal and we were 
looking to extend the current contract and because that is 
one of the mechanisms that we can, rather than getting 
into a new contract.  I am not sure if I have answered your 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 68 of 193 
 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no, that is fine.  Okay, you may 
continue. 
DR NTETA:   So, the discussion initially was purely in 
terms of, we have coal, we would like to offer it to Eskom 
and engagements in terms of the period and the volumes.  
As we move closer to the 8 t h of April, I would say perhaps 
the 7 t h or the 6 t h but in that quite close to the 8 t h of April, if 
not on the 8 t h of April itself.  Mr Nath then indicated to me 
to say that, while we have the particular coal to offer we 
10 
would require that Eskom pre-pays for this coal and that is 
where the discussion then starts in terms of a pre-payment 
of coal. Now, when I made reference to the procurement 
policy, my role in terms of procurement is in terms of fuel 
sourcing as a procurement manager.  So, I indicated to Mr 
Nath that now that he is bringing in an element of payment 
terms for the particular coal and it is not specifically in my 
ambit and I am not fully sure in terms of how to go about in 
terms of the payment aspect and it not within the ambit, it 
would be something that finance would have to talk to.  
20 
So I indicated to him that I would have to get back 
to Him with regards to the particular pre-payment.  Once I 
knew that he wanted a pre-payment for the coal, I then 
went to look for my immediate manager, which at the time 
was the senior general manager for primary energy Mr 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 69 of 193 
 
Mbuyani.  I was not able to find him but I was then able to 
find Mr Edwin Mabelane who is the - at the time was the 
chief procurement officer.  
And I indicated to him that while we have been - 
there is an offer for particular coal from Tegeta they have 
now put in a pre-precondition for a pre-payment of this 
particular coal.  And I sought his guidance in terms of how 
would - how should I go about this particular transaction, 
bearing in mind that as the procurement manager within a 
primary energy, I am used to the - I will call it the vanilla 
10 
procurement of coal.  
He then advised me…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:   I would pause. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, thank you sorry if I may.  I would 
like you to explain to the Chairperson when in his approach 
to you, Mr. Nath, does he make a pre-payment request 
because as we recall from the evidence last time Tegeta 
had two short term contracts with Eskom already at this 
stage by the 8 t h of April 2016.  
20 
So there was a short term contract in January 2016, 
another short term contract concluded in February 2016, 
which was about to expire in April 2016.  Those contracts 
were for Tegeta to supply coal to our north power station.  
If you agree speak to the mic? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 70 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes, there were two previous requirements.  
So my understanding of your question is that when exactly 
did 
he 
then 
indicate 
that 
there 
was 
a 
pre-payment 
requirement for the coal.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
DR NTETA:   The pre-payment that - the requirement for 
pre-payment was, I would say, probably between the 6 t h 
and the 8 t h of April, I cannot say exact date, just to 
indicate that prior to that we had been communicating, but 
we have only been communicating on the acquisition of 
10 
coal without discussing the payment terms. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is important to…[intervene] 
DR NTETA:   Have I answered your question Advocate? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that is important to note because 
you would have seen Mr Khoza also says that when the 
request came to them, to the BTC or to - in his initial 
discussions with Mr Edwin Mabelane he understood the 
request only to relate to the acquisition of coals and not to 
a pre-payment request. 
DR NTETA:   I have seen the affidavit of Mr Khoza with 
20 
regards to and you are highlighting his conversation with 
Mr Mabelane.  I would rather suggest that you speak to 
either Mr Khoza or Mr Mabelane with regards to that 
because the initial discussion that I had with Mr Mabelane 
was in the period between the 6 t h and the 8 t h of April.  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 71 of 193 
 
And it was prior to me beginning to draft the 
document because my conversation with him was where I 
then sought the advice in terms of how to go about and 
including the prepayment in a submission for coal.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see. 
DR NTETA:   So I find it hard to believe that Mr Khoza did 
not know that there was a pre-payment requirement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I see; by way he was the Chairperson 
of the BTC. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, he was the Chairperson of the Board 
10 
Tender Committee and the document indicates on the first 
page second resolution pre-payment.  So I find it hard to 
believe that he did not know. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, just proceed where you ended 
you are approaching Mr Mabelane. 
DR NTETA:   So I approached Mr Mabelane and his advice 
to me was then to prepare a submission for the acquisition 
of coal because the acquisition of coal is not simply just 
the acquisition of coal but there are payment terms which 
are not the standard payment terms for coal and that it 
20 
should rather than go to the Board Tender Committee.  
So having had that discussion with Mr Mabelane I 
then commenced with the drafting of the submission 
document.  As I indicated earlier is that why I had sought 
guidance and advice in terms of the submission is that as 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 72 of 193 
 
the 
procurement 
manager 
within 
primary 
energy, 
I 
personally had not dealt with a pre-payment for coal.  So I 
then in terms of the drafting began to engage and send 
several versions and drafts to Mr Mabelane. 
Included 
in 
that 
my 
interactions 
and 
my 
engagements, I also then engaged with Ms Daniels with 
regards to the particular submission.  The submission then 
was drafted and I am going to use the evidence that was 
provided to me by the investigators, that in terms of the 
timeframe, that the submission was then drafted from about 
10 
the 8 t h up until the 11 t h, in terms of April.   
In that period, I engaged both telephonically as well 
as via emails, which is where you see various drafts of the 
document on the particular submission and I engaged with 
my superiors, which would be specifically Mr Mboweni, Mr 
Mabelane, Ms Daniels and Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, sorry just pause there for a 
moment. 
DR NTETA:   There were…[intervene] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just pause there I beg your pardon.  I 
20 
think we should also indicate to the Chairperson that the 
8 t h is actually a Friday and that this draft in which takes 
place during this period is being pursued over the weekend 
and the 11 t h is a Monday when the submission is ultimately 
placed before the BTC.  Correct? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 73 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So you would have worked over the 
weekend, 
exchanging 
the 
draft 
submission 
between 
yourself 
and 
Ms 
Daniels 
and 
the 
officials 
and 
the 
executives that you have mentioned. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I would have done that, as I indicated to 
you I had to look at it in terms of the evidence that the 
investigators provided to me and I think most of the 
drafting looks like it was on the Sunday based on the email 
exchanges that happened.  But I do believe the [audio 
10 
froze] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The line is frozen.  Chair, while we 
wait for her depending on the Chairpersons preference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, if there is something you want to 
deal with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, we could - when she comes back, 
we could go into those emails Chairperson, just for the 
Chairperson to follow what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we can do that.  I wonder whether 
we should adjourn or not. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I was going to propose that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay let us adjourn to enable the 
technicians to attend to the problem.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 74 of 193 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand that there is a risk that there 
might be a repetition but let us hope for the best. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Dr Nteta was apparently experiencing 
load shedding but they are now be it set towards their using 
10 
the generator. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  No thank you Dr Nteta.  Let us 
hope everything will go well. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:  (Not audible). 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You recall where you were – that is the 
drafting of the submission. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The drafting is done. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Over the weekend and I think if you  - if 
you can please you need to take the Chairperson through the 
evidence so if you could go to the annexures show the 
Chairperson this is the email that was sent from yourself to 
Ms Daniels or Mr Mboweni.  I think you should do so.  Thank 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 75 of 193 
 
you. 
DR NTETA:  Okay.  I will try my best. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  If you need the – if you need the page 
references I will assist you. 
DR NTETA:  So – okay.  Thank you.  So I was at the – in 
terms of the drafting of the submissions I also just omitted to 
indicate as well on the 8t h April and in fact in the times 
leading up to it we also within Primary Energy we have a 
division – so we have an activations called the Primary 
Energy Tactical Command Centre.  And this Primary Energy 
10 
Tactical Command Centre the evidence leader will then want 
me to take you to the – the – it is actually in one of the 
submissions I got it is U27 MMK860. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I think Mr Seleka will assist. 
DR NTETA:  861.  Okay 866. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the page – is that the page number? 
DR NTETA:  I am referring you to it just as a reference point 
as well for this Primary Energy Tactical Command Centres. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR NTETA:  So when there is  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay hang on. 
DR NTETA:  An issue in terms of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on just – Dr Nteta.  You have made – 
you have referred us to a certain page. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 76 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you are referring to some memo in 
that page if I am not mistaken.  Do you want us to go there 
or it is not necessary? 
DR NTETA:  I do not think it is necessary but I will allow for 
the evidence leader to guide if you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
DR NTETA:  If you need to look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  Okay. 
DR NTETA:  I am going to mention it in passing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Okay.  Just continue – just say 
10 
again what it is I think you were mentioning what that 
document is? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So the Primary Energy Department has 
what we call a tactical command centre which gets activated 
when there is an issue with regards to predominantly the 
supply of coal. 
 
So I am referring to this particular meeting and I am 
also referring to this particular event because that particular 
event was happening on the 8 April.  
 
So what was in terms of the leader we – there was a 
20 
supplier that was wanting to provide coal.  There was an 
issue in terms of we were not meeting the requirements for 
in terms of the expected requirements for coal and the 
Primary Energy Tactical Command Centre had indicated that 
we need to start looking for additional coal. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 77 of 193 
 
 
This particular division – this Tactical Command 
Centre is what we would then initiate in terms of the 
requirement or the need which the procurement person 
should the field sourcing person would then act on. 
 
I provide that as just background.  So now – so there 
was a requirement for coal.  The Tactical Command Centre 
had also indicated that we require coal and the supplier was 
then looking in terms of coal and I approached Mr Mabelane 
in terms of guidance, in terms of how do we then take this 
transaction 
forward 
bearing 
in 
mind 
there 
are 
some 
10 
conditions that relate to pre-payment. 
 
Now leading to the exchange of emails that went over 
– happened over the weekend.  So the submission document 
was initially drafted by myself and then it was then sent – 
and then it was then sent through to Ms Daniels, Mr 
Mabelane, Mr Mboweni and Mr Koko.   
I would like to request and this is delegating 
upwards.  I would like to request the evidence leader to just 
indicate the annexure with regards to the emails that were 
sent on Sunday. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Chair that is – that is page – Eskom 
Bundle 14 page 189.  Page 189. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have got it. 
DR NTETA:  So what you see before you is one of the emails 
that was then sent through – that had the attachment of one 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 78 of 193 
 
of the – the versions of the submission document that – that 
a I am referring to in terms of the submission. 
 
So in that period I was engaging both as I indicated 
via email as well as telephonically to get the submission 
prepared. 
 
The morning of the 11t h my principles had received 
the particular document and they had comments with regards 
to the various documents for which they would then call me 
and when I say principles I will speak about Ms Daniels, Mr 
Mabelane, Mr Mboweni and Mr Koko. 
10 
 
They would – they called me with regards to inputs 
for the particular submission. They also provided inputs via 
email in terms of track changes, comments with regards to 
the document. 
 
The date is now the 11 April and it is during the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on one second Dr Nteta.   
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the attachment to the email at page 189 
was the draft – was the Executive summary that starts at 
page 190, is that right? 
20 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  And when you say by 
principal you refer to the people that you mentioned are they 
all – do you call all of them principal or what?  Principles or 
what? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 79 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  No principle – so when I refer to the word 
principle what I am say – what I was trying to say that it is 
people who would – would be my seniors.  I am not too sure 
what word I should use. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay.  Well seniors seems to be 
better because principle is – well I do not know if you said 
principles there we must just do just one – so that is the 
category of people you are talking about. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And when you say they called you did they 
10 
all call you? 
DR NTETA:  So the four people that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry when you say they called you 
did they all call you or they had a discussion among 
themselves and one of them called you on behalf of the 
whole group or what? 
DR NTETA:  So when I say called I do not know if they would 
have had a discussion among themselves.  What I am 
referring to is that they would – for example Mr Mabelane 
would then pick up the phone and then indicate you have 
20 
sent the document this is the change etcetera or Ms Daniels 
would do so.  So I am just saying it was at different times.  
What I am trying to demonstrate here is that I was 
coordinating input from several different people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  You may continue. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 80 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  Thank you.  The input that I was also 
coordinating was both via telephone, it was also via email in 
terms of comments that they sent through. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Let us – let us look at… 
DR NTETA:  This was – this… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let us look at… 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Your email on page 189.  You email on 
page 189 is from yourself to Ms Suzanne Daniels.  It is sent 
on Sunday 10 April 2016 at 20:17.  You see that?  You see 
10 
that? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I am getting there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh you getting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka I may have misunderstood you 
earlier on I had thought – I thought you had said the 11 t h was 
a Friday or was it… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The 8t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The 8t h oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  The 11t h is a Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And they working over the weekend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To land on Monday and submit the 
document … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 81 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  To BTC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You are there now Dr Nteta? 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Good.  Chair she is using the electronic 
version so it takes a while for her to get to the right page. 
DR NTETA:  Yes I am on 14190 Executive Summary. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay I wanted you to be on the page 
10 
before that which is your email to Ms Suzanne Daniels and 
there you write: 
“Hi, please see attached Executive Summary.  
I have not addressed the pre-payment issue.  
It is in the resolution only.  Regards Ayanda.” 
You see that? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I see that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Can you explain to the Chairperson 
what you – you meant by that statement. 
“I have not addressed the pre-payment issue.  It is in the 
20 
resolution only.” 
DR NTETA:  So that particular statement in the email was to 
highlight to Ms Daniels that the – the resolution in terms of 
the requirement – the request for a pre-payment is in the 
resolution.  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 82 of 193 
 
 
Now the general document it is about a four to five 
page document. So it was just to highlight to her that I have 
put it in the resolution, make her aware that it is in the 
resolution and then just to gain guidance if it needs to be 
added elsewhere within the particular document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay now go to page 190.  Go to page 
190.   
DR NTETA:  190? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes the next page. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Just please guide us as to where… 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  What is the resolution in this document? 
DR NTETA:  It is… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Where the pre-payment is incorporated?  
So I see on page 190 you have paragraph 1. 
DR NTETA:  So the resolution is in … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja carry on. 
DR NTETA:  Ja.  So where it was highlighting that is in 
paragraph 2 in terms of resolution required and it is 2.2 
20 
where it says: 
“To provide a pre-payment of the R500million 
for coal to be supplied.” 
That particular resolution. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now I think you need to tell the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 83 of 193 
 
Chairperson 
also 
who 
came 
up 
with 
the 
amount 
of 
R500million? 
DR NTETA:  So with regards to the R500million it would 
have been an estimate in terms of the calculation of the rand 
value versus – times the – the rand per gigajoule at the time.  
So you would  
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is frozen again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the problem again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Was it the (not audible).  
Apparently it is on her side Chairperson.  It has been 
10 
disconnected again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  
ADV SELEKA SC:  We will have to suggest now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is going to give us a problem 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And actually – but now there is a 
generator.  Why – why is it giving us the problems?  I guess 
it is not – nobody knows what… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja they are trying to communicate with 
her. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay she has sent a text message she 
does not know what to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What could be the problem? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Just ask her what the problem is. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 84 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us – let me adjourn.  Let us see 
what happens in the next ten minutes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we will take it from there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we may have to ask those who – 
who are… 
DR NTETA:  I am back.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay she is back.  I will - may have to ask 
her … 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ms Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A witness is particularly who are within 
Gauteng to come to the venue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Physically rather than the video link 
because with load shedding it looks like it could give us 
problems.  Most of the time it has worked quite well.  Last 
week it worked quite well for the whole week.  There are only 
minor glitches here and there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dr Nteta I think it has happened again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No I believe … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dr –  
ADV SELEKA SC:  No unfortunately she is not in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I know I understand that she is KZN? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 85 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Okay.  Maybe she is not… 
DR NTETA:  I am back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay let us use the time we 
have fruitfully okay?  Mr Seleka continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Nteta you were 
explaining how the R500 million came about.  You say it is 
the rand value times the volume of coal which is gigajoules. 
DR NTETA:  Yes it is – ja so that R500 million was an 
estimate. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  In terms of – it was just – it was really a rough 
calculation it had not been verified fully. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But who made that calculation?  Who had 
made that calculation? 
DR NTETA:  I am going to – I am going to – I am going to 
say that I would have made that calculation.  It is – it would 
have just been a general figure.  I am going to say I would 
have made that calculation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
DR NTETA:  As an estimate. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The reason I am asking that… 
DR NTETA:  To ask you I do not recall – I do not recall ja.  
Let me just say I do not recall. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja because this is on a Sunday.  This is 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 86 of 193 
 
the reason why I am asking this because when you look at 
your affidavit you go to page 70 – back to page 71 of your 
affidavit paragraph 8.4.   
DR NTETA:  Can you please provide me with the page 
number? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 71.  71. 
DR NTETA:  71 thank you. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja Eskom Bundle 14 page 71 paragraph 
8.4. 
DR NTETA:  Eskom.  Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  In that paragraph you say that Mr Nath 
indicated that Tegeta wished to supply coal from OCM to 
Eskom. 
“I cannot recall whether Mr Nath and I had 
talked about any quantities or process at this 
stage.” 
So it is volumes which is quantities. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You cannot recall whether or not they 
were talked about how would you have made the calculation 
20 
to arrive at the R500 million? 
DR NTETA:  So in my affidavit I am – my attempt is to 
provide – to provide a narrative in terms of the discussions 
that we had.  So at the very beginning of the discussions all 
I was trying to just put across is that he had indicated 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 87 of 193 
 
initially that they have coal. 
 
In our subsequent conversations there would have 
been a figure and also a quantity that is – that is an 
indicative quantity that is provided as well as an indicative 
cost that is provided.  
 
So by the time that we were talking on the 8t h then 
there would have been some sort of an indicative pricing and 
quantity as well as you know a duration and that – you know 
in terms of the period as well. 
 
So in my affidavit I was just simply trying to say in 
10 
the beginning it – we – the first conversations that we had I 
cannot recall if … 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  You know what we had settled in terms of the 
volumes and the – and the gigajoule price. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes the – there is a question I have I 
think you did touch on this last time as we were beginning to 
go into this aspect. 
 
By this time just confirm to the Chairperson – by this 
time of the negotiations or Mr Nath approaching you and you 
20 
drafting the submission over the weekend he has not given 
you in writing the offer that he is making to Eskom. 
DR NTETA:  Correct. So in the initial discussions we – it was 
– it was literally discussions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Hm. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 88 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  So he had not given a written – a written 
document to say this is the exact cost, this is the exact 
volumes.  It – it was – it was discussions that we had.  
Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now we know that and we will take 
you step by step your estimation which you say it is for R500 
million it ended up being R659 million  pre-payment to 
Tegeta.   
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Can you tell the Chairperson how did the 
10 
amount move from R500 million estimation to R659 million 
exact payment to Tegeta? 
DR NTETA:  Okay.  So with regards to the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Wait I am sorry. 
DR NTETA:  Moving from R500 million to R659 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:  As I indicated to you earlier is that the R500 
million… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Dr Nteta. 
DR NTETA:  Pardon I thought I heard somebody speaking. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am sorry. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The question that Mr Seleka is asked is 
quite important but I think before that I may have missed 
something as to how the initial amount came about – the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 89 of 193 
 
R500 million. How did that amount - how was it arrived at? 
DR NTETA:  What – what – so in terms of the R500 million it 
– it was a guesstimate. Mr Seleka has asked me in terms of 
who – who exactly gave the figure of the R500 million and I 
have indicated that I cannot recall if Mr Nath gave me that 
R500 million or it would have been a guesstimate in terms of 
coming from my side for the – for the figure based on the 
discussions that we had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I saw that in your affidavit. 
DR NTETA:  So that the next.. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I saw that in your affidavit. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said I think that in the first – in the 
initial discussions I think you said but you must correct me if 
I 
have 
misunderstood 
your 
affidavit. 
 
In 
the 
initial 
discussions with Mr Nath there was no discussion of 
quantities and the costs.  Did that change before the – the 
11t h or before the first draft – before the draft of the 
Executive summary that is at page 190 did that change? 
DR NTETA:  Yes.  So my affidavit I was trying to relay 
20 
because one of the questions in terms of that came from the 
investigators was that so when exactly did you speak about 
the quantities that are required?  And what I was trying to 
relay in my affidavit was an attempt to respond to that 
question was to say that when he first approached me he 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 90 of 193 
 
indicated that they do have coal that they would like to 
supply.  
 
Now we have subsequent conversations because at 
the time when I had said it around about end of March I 
would say they were still supplying coal so like Doctor you 
have coal and we begin to say yes there will be an interest 
for the coal. 
 
The 
conversations 
then 
you 
know 
would 
have 
happened intermittently up until the 8t h where then there is a 
discussion how much coal is available in terms of the rand 
10 
value exec – the rand per gigajoule cost in terms of the coal 
and then that is where we then put the figure in terms of the 
estimate in terms of the R500 million.  Whatever figure it is 
in this case it would be R500 million.  But that particular 
figure would – would then be verified before we finalise the 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you. 
DR NTETA:  I have tried to answer both the Chairperson and 
the evidence leader’s questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the evidence leader nods with how… 
20 
DR NTETA:  Can I continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you must have answered both.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Not the last one Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when I have had that – that is what I 
was thinking that I did not [speaking over one another]. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 91 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  So should I continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How the figure moved from R500 million to  
the ultimate figure. Did you want to address that question? 
DR NTETA:  Okay.  So in terms of getting to the R500 million 
to the ultimate figure.  So at the point where the evidence 
leader is indicating in terms of that particular page 190 at 
that point I had really in terms of the submission just 
grounded a number and I will tell you there was no scientific 
relevance – basis of it in terms of just an estimate.  My 
subsequent email when I then sent it through to the – with 
10 
agreed my seniors indicates that – and that would be the 
next evidence so the next annexure.  
 
My document indicates – my email indicates that I 
would need to then verify these particular numbers with 
finance and that – and that really just to talk to what is the 
volume, what is the rand per gigajoule to get to that – the 
figure of the R659 million. 
 
So the – that final figure would have been – would 
have come from whatever volume that is finalised and then 
the rand per gigajoule. 
20 
 
So that change happened during the course I think 
and I am saying this based on the documentation not 
necessarily based on my recollection so that – that changed 
from R500 million to R650 would have then come – I was 
going to say within the day of the 11 t h.  Once again I am 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 92 of 193 
 
saying I am basing it on the documentation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh. So you – you do not have an 
independent recollection? 
DR NTETA:  Pardon. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  You do not have an independent 
recollection of what transpired? 
DR NTETA:  I do not have an independent ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   There is a question I had but before I 
ask you that question.   
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Which email are you referring to as 
your next piece of evidence? 
DR NTETA:   So the email that I am referring to is the 
email that starts with good evening.  I just have not – I am 
getting to it.  It starts with good evening but it is sent on 
the morning of the 11 t h at 07:22.  I am trying to get to the – 
to that particular document.  Evidence Leader, if you are 
able to get the page number, I would greatly appreciate it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, I see there are a couple of 
emails on the 10 t h.  If the first email that I see on the 11 t h 
20 
is on page 209. 
DR NTETA:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But that is not an email from... 
DR NTETA:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, there are two emails.  One – the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 93 of 193 
 
bottom one is from yourself to Mr Edwin Mabelane and then 
his response to you, page 209, Eskom Bundle 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you see ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Page two...  Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   209. 
DR NTETA:   Is it two? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Two, zero, nine. 
DR NTETA:   Two, zero, nine.  Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because I think ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Apologies.  I just take some time to get to 
10 
this.  Yes.  Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, I think you were referring to an 
email in your explanation of how the figures were arrived 
there. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So I was – what I was just trying to 
relate to the Chairperson and to the Evidence Leader was 
just in terms of the – I was trying to relate the movements 
in terms of the R500 million to the R 659 million and saying 
that – just recalling – my recollection which is not 
independent, is based on the documentation and saying 
20 
that particular compactisation[sic] of the figure would have 
come based on the mandate.  It is just what I was just 
trying to explain.   
 
I had recalled going through the evidence, one of 
the emails that was shown to me, was one where I was 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 94 of 193 
 
saying I am going to do so.  I am going to check in terms 
of finance as to the particular number.  But to us indicate 
and still remember that move, I do not independently do 
so.  I am relying on the evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  You see there is evidence before 
the Commission that at the same time as Eskom is doing 
this exercise.  Yourself involved and in particular in what 
you call an estimated figure of R 500 million.  There is 
parallel information of what transpires at the same time 
when this is happening.   
10 
 
And that relates to this.  That Tegeta and Oakbay 
were in the process of acquiring Optimum at the time.  You 
can hear me? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I can hear you Evidence Leader.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  And you know, for you – I do not 
know – you do not have the advantage of the first leg of 
the process.  We are now in the second leg of the process.  
The first leg relates to the board making an approval of 
R 1.68 billion.   
 
This is now the second leg of the process where a 
20 
figure is came – you came up with a figure which is so 
surprisingly close to the figure that Tegeta requires in 
order to make the final payment of the purchase price to 
acquire OCM. 
 
And what happens is...  Well, I will give you a 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 95 of 193 
 
chance 
to 
comment. 
 
The 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission...  Chair, it seems we are going to be 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  She is gone again. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Except for Ms Daniels, are there any 
other witnesses in the next two days that intend to testify 
via the streaming? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I think there was a request from 
Mr Pamensky’s legal representatives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But I was also told that Mr Pamensky 
is keen to come in person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am not sure whether that was 
pursued. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It is - if they can come in person 
that gives us some assurance. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we will not have interruptions.  I 
wonder whether we should not just take lunch now.  It is 
quarter to one.  Then at quarter to two, hopefully, when we 
come back it will not be so bad. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 96 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if we adjourn for another five or 
ten minutes, when we come back it will be ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It will be lunch time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So I think we will adjourn and then 
somebody can just inform her and then we will resume at 
quarter to two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta, can you hear us? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  Thank you.  I also moved location. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that is fine.  So you – yes, I was 
explaining to you that at the same time that this was 
happening, the acquisition process of OCM by Tegeta was 
also ongoing. 
 
And from the evidence of one of the witnesses 
20 
before the Commission, Mr Piers Marsden, who was the 
Business Rescue Practitioner of OCM at the time.   
 
We understand that on the 8 t h, he had been 
approached 
by 
Mr 
Howa, 
Nazeem 
Howa, 
with 
an 
explanation that Tegeta had a shortfall of R 600 million 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 97 of 193 
 
towards the purchase price of OCM. 
 
And he requested Mr Marsden to approach the 
banks as a consortium of banks to either defer the payment 
of R 600 million or afford Tegeta a bridging loan.  The 
banks, when approached, refused their request.  Were you 
aware of that? 
DR NTETA:   No, I was not aware of that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that in fact, it was around 15:00 
on the 8 t h of April 2016 that Mr Marsden communicated the 
banks’ refusal to Mr Howa.  And it seems to us, and I refer 
10 
to 
the 
Commission, 
emanating 
from 
that 
evidence 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to say the Legal Team? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Legal Team. 
DR NTETA:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  [laughs] 
DR NTETA:   [laughs] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  It seems to the 
Legal Team that emanating from that evidence that the 
prepayment we are now talking about which forms the – 
20 
which is at the centre of your submission, would have come 
about.  Your comment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not sure that you completed the 
point.  You just want to start again?  I think you did not 
complete the point properly. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 98 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I think what you are suggesting is 
that – what you are suggesting to her is that it seems that 
the prepayment that she is talking about in her submission 
is connected with the amount that Tegeta was looking for 
which they could not get from the banks. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What – did you hear the point 
Dr Nteta? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I do. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say to the suggestion that 
it is just seems too coincidental that initially around the 
end of March, Mr Nath did not talk to you about the 
prepayment but somewhere around, as I understand your 
evidence, 7, 8 or 8, 9 or there about of April the – he 
introduced the idea of a prepayment. 
 
And Mr Seleka is saying it so happens that 
attempts by them to find a bank to give them that amount 
or to defer an amount that they owed to the bank had failed 
and 
the 
amount 
that 
became 
the 
prepayment 
was 
20 
roundabout the same amount that they needed.   
 
Mr Seleka, tell me if I have misrepresented your 
point. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not misrepresented Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 99 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The Chairperson is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say to that Dr Nteta? 
DR NTETA:   Thank you.  I must say there is little that I 
can make comment because I was not aware of the 
information that you are saying to me there were attempts 
at that time, they were looking to get the – I think you just 
said the R 600 million and it was declined. 
 
So at the time when I was discussing with Mr Nath, 
you are quite correct in saying that the initial discussion 
that we did have, which was before the 8 t h, was purely 
10 
about provision of coal and there was no indication with 
regards to the prepayment. 
 
So the investigators and the evidence leaders in 
them having an understanding of what was happening in 
the background, that may be the case but I really cannot 
comment on it. 
 
What I can comment on is that Mr Nath indicated 
to me roundabout the – between the 6 t h and the 8 t h that 
there is a precondition for the coal, whether it is linked to, 
you know, their requirement for funding, et cetera.  I 
20 
cannot comment because I did not know that background, 
you know, at the time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I want to quickly cover certain points 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 100 of 193 
 
with you then that you can move on in your evidence 
Dr Nteta.  Dr Nteta, the paragraph that you read from your 
affidavit which explicitly says Mr Nath indicated that Tegeta 
was going to buy coal from OCM to supply to Eskom.  Do 
you know why Eskom did not procure coal directly from 
OCM? 
DR NTETA:   So we did not get it directly from OCM 
because the Business Rescue Practitioner had indicated 
that they were not going to supply us with coal. 
 
Secondly, they had the year before had actually 
10 
stopped in terms of the production of coal.  So that is why 
we did not specifically go directly to OCM.  And then 
thirdly, Tegeta offered that particular coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, but are you saying that you did not 
know the facts the Business Rescue Practitioners on 
20 August 2015, they communicated that they will stop the 
supply.  But thereafter, and more specifically ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
More 
specifically 
from 
the 
3 r d of September, they continued to supply coal.  Even in 
20 
April 2015 they were supplying coal.  In 2016, they were 
supplying coal to the Hendrina Power Station.  Are you 
saying that you did not know that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  I knew that they were supplying coal to 
the Hendrina Power Station.  My understanding - and I will 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 101 of 193 
 
say that I am not a mining engineer – my understanding is 
that the coal that they were supplying to Hendrina was for 
a CV and the coal that they were looking to supply us for – 
Arnot was of a higher CD, which was due to beneficiation 
to come through – so it would become a higher product 
from the export mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Seleka.  Can I go back to 
the issue of Tegeta offering coal, this particular coal?  I 
may have asked this question before and if I have, please 
forgive me but I would like to be reminded what the answer 
10 
as. 
 
Is it not the position that the coal that Tegeta was 
offering Eskom did not at that stage belong to Tegeta? 
DR 
NTETA: 
 
 
So 
my 
understanding 
that 
is 
my 
understanding from the evidence of the transaction, that 
the transaction was due to – I think it was – yes, I did not 
answer your question directly.  No, it did not belong to 
Tegeta.  They had taken over the operations of the mine 
only. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Could they offer coal to Eskom that did 
20 
not belong to them? 
DR NTETA:   So yes, they could offer coal that did not 
belong to them.  In my discussions with Mr Nath in or 
around January or so, he did indicate that they had taken 
over the operations of the mind.   
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 102 of 193 
 
 
So that – only I understood it to mean that they 
would then indicate where the coal goes, et cetera.  But in 
terms of offering coal that does not belong to a mine.  Yes, 
a supplier can do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not understand the concept of 
them being able to offer Eskom coal that did not belong to 
them just because they had taken over the operations of 
the mine unless the arrangement was such that the owner 
of the coal allowed them to offer coal to somebody.   
 
Are you able to clarify that for me?  Is it something 
10 
that used to happen as a practise of a custom in the coal 
section as far as Eskom is concerned? 
DR NTETA:   So correctly so that you will get somebody 
who does not actually own the asset, offering the coal.  So 
what would happen in other instances as well.  You would 
have what we call a Marketing Agent who will then be the 
individual that is marketing the coal and they do not 
necessarily own that coal but they offer the coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I take ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   In some instances, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I take it that if they are a Marketing 
Agent, either when you conclude a contract concerning the 
coal, you conclude it with the owner.  Or if you concluded it 
with the Marketing Agent, the contract of the coal being 
offered to you, that the agent would be doing so with the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 103 of 193 
 
authority, authorisation of the owner.   
 
I may be missing something but if I give you my 
taxi for you to drive, you cannot start selling it.  That is 
where I am coming from.  But I may be missing something 
because I have never worked at Eskom and I have never 
worked in the coal sector. 
 
You understand what I am talking about?  The 
driver – as a driver of my taxi, if I employ you, it may well 
be that you can conclude an arrangement with somebody 
who says tomorrow please take me Durban.  We will come 
10 
back in the evening and I will pay you.  How much will it 
cost?  You do that.   
 
That money is supposed to come to me, the owner.  
But you cannot start selling the car.  You understand? 
DR NTETA:   If I try and use that particular example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR NTETA:   And it is going to be an attempt to use an 
example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR NTETA:   It would be that if you ask me to take me from 
20 
Johannesburg to Durban in a taxi that the driver does not 
own but I will pay the driver for taking me there.  So the 
driver would then have to pay the taxi owner in terms of 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   To hand over the money. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 104 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   For the usage of the car of the taxi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To hand over the money that you have 
paid over to the driver? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  I accept that.  But it just 
seems to me that the selling of the coal seems to be 
something different but maybe I miss something.  So 
because I just want to understand why you were to waiting 
until Tegeta had concluded its transaction with OCM.  
 
Then they would be the lawful owners of the coal, I 
10 
would imagine.  But in the meantime, why not negotiate 
with the owners as far as the coal is concerned? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  As I indicated, the direct owners were 
not offering in terms of the coal to Eskom.  And I am also 
providing this response in hindsight, obviously.  So the 
direct owners were not and Tegeta was offering the 
particular coal. 
 
They had offered it in January as well as in 
February, as the Evidence Leader had said.  And so they 
had demonstrated the ability to provide us with the coal.   
20 
So which is why we were then getting coal from them.   
 
The 
question 
as 
to 
why 
not 
wait 
until 
the 
transaction is concluded.  One of the reasons why it was 
not waiting.  At the time, we were looking for coal.  There 
was, as I have indicated at the very beginning, we had 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 105 of 193 
 
what we have as our – a primary energy, tactical command 
centre that was meeting quite regularly because of an 
issue for coal.  
 
So the option of waiting until the transaction was 
concluded was limited and I would say not as attractive 
because we from the skill sourcing side had pressure to 
acquire coal. 
 
And the last interaction that we did have in terms 
of that we needed to acquire coal was at the tactical 
command centre on the 8 t h of April where they instructed 
10 
myself and the team to secure coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   I have tried to answer you as best that I can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine.  But of 
course, the moment you say to me the owner of the coal 
was against giving you the coal.  That seems to make your 
situation worse because it means you know that the owner 
of the coal does not want to give the coal to you for 
whatever reasons, valid or not valid.   
 
And somebody else who is not the owner of the 
20 
coal, comes to you and offer somebody else’s coal and you 
know that that somebody else does not want this coal to be 
offered to you. 
 
Does it not make it worse?  It looks like collusion 
between Eskom and Tegeta to do something, that on the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 106 of 193 
 
face of it appears to me, to say the least, strange.   
DR NTETA:   So Chairperson it is not unusual and it is an 
unfortunate situation that Eskom – we find ourselves in.  
Where you would have an owner of coal indicating that 
they do not want to directly transact with Eskom.   
 
Some of the owners might have said to us:  Well, 
you as Eskom are looking in terms of power based Black 
Economic Empowerment and I as the owner of the asset 
and who invested.   
 
So therefore, you would deal with our Marketing 
10 
Agent or they just do not want to deal with our – sorry, 
Eskom’s reasons.   
 
So it is not so -  unfortunately, it is not uncommon 
that that happens when the asset owner just says that I do 
not want to deal with Eskom.  I will give my coal to 
somebody and they will deal with it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But in this case was this your situation?  
I mean, the scenario that you tell me, seems to me that it 
is a scenario where the owner may, for whatever reason, 
not want to deal with Eskom but actually when the 
20 
Marketing Agent or whoever deals with Eskom, they do so 
with the blessing or permission of the owner in the sense 
that the owner knows that the third party or the Marketing 
Agent will actually be doing this.   
 
They may just have some other reasons why the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 107 of 193 
 
owner does not want to deal with that but it seems that the 
owner has no objection.  But in this particular case, are 
you able to say the Business Rescue Practitioners had no 
objection to Tegeta offering you OCM’s coal at that time? 
DR NTETA:   I would say at the time, I would assume they 
had no objection because they were supplying that coal 
from OCM.  So which – they would have done so on two 
previous agreements. 
 
So I would say that at the time I would assume that 
they do not have an objection.  I would also assume and I 
10 
am saying so based on at the time that the Business 
Rescue Practitioner was aware where that coal was going.  
To answer you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   The... 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  Complete your answer Dr Nteta 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So when I was providing you with the 
example to say that that happens at other situation 
because you asked me if it is not unusual.  So I was just 
indicating that no it is not unusual where you will deal with 
20 
somebody and not the asset owner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you, Chair.  Dr Nteta, I am 
not sure whether your answers are given on the basis of a 
factual fairness from what happened at that time.  Or are 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 108 of 193 
 
you simply trying to reason out the actions of Eskom? 
 
One of the things you mentioned is that you had 
been instructed to go out and look for coal but we know 
that in this factual situation you did not go to Tegeta.  
Tegeta came to you with an unsolicited offer.   
 
So the two do not connect that you were instructed 
to go out and look for coal but what we see here is the 
other way around and that is what Mr Khoza expresses as 
a point of concern in this affidavit that this was not 
Eskom’s 
initiative, 
it 
was 
Tegeta 
coming 
to 
Eskom 
10 
unsolicited.  Your comment? 
DR NTETA:   Okay.  I am going to comment and drew my 
comment, I am going to ask if I can refer to certain 
documents.  The first document that I am going to ask to 
refer to because I want to then just try and create the 
timeline in terms of this particular transaction that we are 
looking at. 
 
The first document, and I am going to really try 
and refer to it correctly.  It is in the Eskom Bundle 18, page 
891.  Eskom Bundle 18, page 891.   
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It seems to be 18(B) Chairperson. 
DR NTETA:   Oh, god.  Okay we had...  Can I continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not yet.  Let us find the document first.   
DR NTETA:   Okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is page 891.   
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 109 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Eight, nine, one.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am at page 891, Bundle 18.   
DR NTETA:   Okay.  So to answer the question in terms of, 
you know, looking for coal and the supply coming through.  
Tegeta, yes came through and indicated that they had coal 
and I indicated earlier that probably from about March, 
they said that our current supply is coming to an end and 
we have availability to provide you, you know, continued 
coal. 
 
And that is when I referred to saying that the 
10 
supply came to me.  That is what they would do.  The 
supplier would do that in the normal course because if they 
have got coal, they always to want to extend in terms of 
their particular offering 
 
Now I have referred to this particular page and I 
am going to refer to another page to then indicate that 
when you look in terms of this, it was an email that was 
written from what we would call our coal operations – coal 
demand side.   
 
So from a fuel source’s perspective, the demand or 
20 
the requirement for coal then comes from the coal demand 
side.  And we received this coal.  Now when – so we 
received this email.  When we get this email – and I am 
just going to try to provide context. 
 
The highlight of the email there it – she indicates: 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 110 of 193 
 
“ Good morning and please find attached the 
status report.” 
 
And she underlined in that particular email the 
power station in terms of Arnot because it was a concern in 
terms of us being able to secure coal for Arnot.   
 
And she indicated that there the deliveries that 
were due to come to the power station – I am just going to 
use – round it up – because it says 14 kilo tons – against a 
plan of 22.   
 
What that translates is that we are not delivering 
10 
the required amount of coal to that particular power 
station. 
 
The second element and that is a concern because 
we need to ensure that we are meeting whatever is 
planned.  So we are under – we – the primary energy is 
underperforming. 
 
Her next sentence indicates that the burn is 15 kilo 
tons in terms of their burning 15 kilo tons against what the 
power station had indicated to us so that they should 
rather burn 14 kilo tons. 
20 
 
But also then – so the picture that is – that she is 
highlighting in those statements, is simply saying that we 
are getting too little coal into Arnot and we are burning 
what we are supposed to against a burn that is even more. 
 
So then it creates an issue in terms of supplying.  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 111 of 193 
 
You will notice that this particular email is sent at 08:00(?) 
in the morning.  I am not going to refer...   
 
So this is on the 8 t h.  I have been discussing with 
Mr Nath correctly so, predominantly about just supplying 
coal because one, in that period of time, we do understand 
that we need coal for Arnot because we are being advised 
of this quite often that we need to ensure this particular 
coal. 
 
So he offers me this coal and I then looked and 
noting that the organisation in the primary [indistinct – 
10 
word cut off] have an issue that in terms of getting coal, so 
that is sort of when – I am trying to answer one, Mr 
Khoza’s indication that when if there was a problem then 
why did we not go to them.  Well, the problem intensified 
on and about the 8 April and so we know that we do have 
potential for receiving the coal from this particular supply 
is one of the elements that myself and my team on. 
 
I then want to refer you to on the same day, so we 
have this email coming at about eight and there is a 
concern within the department.  They then call that TED 
20 
tactical command centre.  I am now going to refer to Mr 
Koko’s affidavit and that is MMK53 which is the Eskom 
bundle 15 of 864, page 864, and I will pause. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I do not think you will have that.  
I do not think the Chairperson will have …[intervenes] 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 112 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Pardon? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, I am speaking now to the 
Chairperson. 
DR NTETA:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Eskom bundle 15, I do not think the 
Chairperson will have it. 
DR NTETA:   I can read it out.  Not?  Sorry, evidence 
leader. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you can do that.  Have we got it 
somewhere? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have it, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  She can read it out in the 
meantime if it is not too long. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, just give us the reference again, 
page number? 
DR NTETA:   MMK53 and then it is in the bundle 15, page 
864. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 864. 
DR NTETA:  I am unclear as to whether I should read.  
Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may read it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, let me just identify the document 
for the Chairperson.  Page 864, bundle 15, Chairperson, 
are minutes of a meeting Primary Energy Division, Tactical 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 113 of 193 
 
Command Centre held on the 8 April 2016.  Ms Nteta, you 
may read the portion you want draw to the Chairperson’s 
attention. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, so the first element is, it is noted the 
email that was sent at about 8.39 in the morning and it 
creates a concern in terms of the department and a tactical 
command centre meeting is then convened.  The time there 
indicated one o’clock and this because the division within 
Primary Energy that activates the demand notice a concern 
and then says let us try and – let us convene and try and 
10 
address the concern.  I want to then refer you to in that 
same documents, I have referred you to the time in an 
effort just to share with you how we get to the submission 
and things like that as well.  
 
I then look to then refer you to the next page which 
is 865 and then we go to the last page which was 865, at 
the bottom it then talks to some of the issues and the 
concerns that are raised.  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I wanted to confirm that you are still 
on the same bundle. 
20 
DR NTETA:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wanted to confirm that you are still on 
the same bundle. 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I am still on the same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How come I do not have that bundle is it 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 114 of 193 
 
because it was not expected that bundle to be referred to? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was – we thought Chair would refer 
to the affidavit of Mr Koko, Chair.  The Chairperson, we 
can sanitise 9 for the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, no, it is fine, I am just trying 
to understand so that we can make sure next time we do 
not find ourselves in the same situation.  No, that is fine, 
let us continue, as long as we do not find ourselves in the 
same situation. 
DR NTETA:   I apologise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, it is fine.  Okay, you may 
continue. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, okay.  So in terms of that there are 
certain aspects that in terms of the minutes and it is – I 
think perhaps I am just trying to show the turn of events.  
So on this day the discussions with regards to Mr Magelani 
about the submission, there is discussions with regards to 
the supplier about the submission.  There is also this 
requirement in terms of the coal that has been indicated to 
the field sourcing department. 
20 
 
One of the key actions that comes out of there is 
that if you look at bullet point 3 – so if you look on item 4, 
bullet point 3, it then talks to the Arnot RFP, once again 
just indicating that there is a concern and we discussed it 
at this particular meeting and it indicated that there is 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 115 of 193 
 
shortfall from May which needs to be addressed and DM, 
which is the Chairperson of the tactical command centre, 
advised that AN, which is myself, now needs to develop a 
proposal for the shortfall call and agree this with Mr – Vusi 
and Matshelo, which is Mr Mboweni and Mr Koko. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta? 
DR NTETA:   Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, the Chairperson needs to follow 
what you are saying.  
DR NTETA:   Okay. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So can you again indicate where you 
are reading from in terms of on that page 8 …[intervenes]   
DR NTETA:   Oh, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Are you reading from page 865? 
DR NTETA:   I am reading on page 865, there are items 
that are there, I am looking at item 4. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   And in item 4 there is – I am going to call it 
bullet point number 3. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, it is written number 3. 
20 
DR NTETA:   Which starts – yes, it is written number 3. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   And it starts Arnot RFP. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, just read it then to the 
Chairperson, read it on record. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 116 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Okay. 
“Arnot RFP went through MCK process.” 
MCK was standing for McKinsey. 
“Will take coal delivery to March 2017.” 
So that is the Arnot RFP.  The next sentence: 
“The shortfall from May 20 …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   sorry, just before you proceed there. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Explain to the Chairperson that first 
sentence.  Arnot RFP, that is a request for proposal, going 
10 
through McKinsey process, you say MCK stands for 
McKinsey process. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Will take coal delivery to March 2017.    
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Can 
you 
explain 
that 
to 
the 
Chairperson please?  What does that mean? 
DR NTETA:   So during this period one of the – yes, I am 
trying to explain the sentence in context. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, proceed? 
20 
DR NTETA:   Should I continue? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, please. 
DR NTETA:  Okay.  So during the process of – I am going 
to say from the 1 January 2016, Arnot power station, which 
was previously supplied coal by Exxaro as well other 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 117 of 193 
 
suppliers, that Exxaro contract had been terminated.  We 
discussed it before, but I will remind you it was terminated 
and there was a dispute between Eskom and Exxaro which 
we discussed before. 
 
So we had issued a request for proposal to replace 
the coal that would have – replaced the allocation of  
Exxaro with this RFP as well as the other suppliers that 
were currently supplying Arnot and that is what is in 
relation to the Arnot RFP. 
 
Now the MCK process is that it was in terms of the 
10 
– we had McKinsey within Eskom also within Primary 
Energy 
that 
were 
looking 
in 
terms 
of 
assisting 
on 
negotiations, looking in terms of costing and things like 
that.  So that is when we sort of – we call it the MCK 
process. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I was trying to explain that sentence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, proceed. There are questions 
regarding the Exxaro. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, alright, sorry. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Proceed? 
DR NTETA:   Okay.  So then the next sentence reads: 
“The 
shortfall 
from 
May 
2016 
needs 
to 
be 
addressed.” 
And then: 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 118 of 193 
 
“DM…” 
Which is the Chairperson tactical command centre 
“…advised that AN…” 
Which is myself. 
“…now needs to develop a proposal for the shortfall 
coal and agree this with Vusi and Matshela.” 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes? 
DR NTETA:   I will then take you also to the next page 
which is page 866 which then …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Just before you do that – sorry, before 
10 
you do that, explain to the Chairperson the last sentence 
you read. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, not a problem.  So the last sentence 
that I read was that I would need to engage with Mr 
Mboweni and Mr Koko with regards to – in essence what it 
is saying is that to address in terms of the shortfall for 
Arnot because there was a concern about it and they 
indicated that I was instructed to engage with them on it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is there a reason why you did not 
mention this document in your affidavit. 
20 
DR NTETA:   To be very honest with you I did not have it, I 
did not see it, it is actually when I was going through Mr 
Koko’s affidavit that I saw this particular – the actual 
minutes, so I did not – what I did recall in my discussions 
with the investigator, I did say that we had a tactical 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 119 of 193 
 
command centre where, you know, the demand is raised 
and – sorry, the demand is raised and then we would act 
on it but I did not have access to the minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Mr Seleka, I understood Dr Nteta to be 
referring to these – I think it is now two documents or is it 
one? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understood her to be referring to that 
document or those documents in order to answer a 
question that you had put to her based on what Mr Khoza 
10 
had said. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to just repeat that question 
because I am not sure that I get the connection between 
what is in the document based on what Dr Nteta is saying 
and that question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is correct, Chair.  Dr Nteta you 
will recall that Mr Khoza finds it surprising and he says the 
approach here to offer coal was not done by Eskom, it was 
not Eskom’s initiative approaching Tegeta, it was Tegeta 
20 
approaching Eskom.  So his point is – and I think it deals 
exactly with what you are trying to say now which if you 
say there was a shortfall, why did Eskom not take that 
initiative to address the shortfall?  Instead Tegeta was the 
one that approaches you with this prepayment request.  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 120 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   I am trying to answer that particular question 
in giving context and maybe it is – I am losing the context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe we should …[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   So all I am trying to say …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dr Nteta, I am sorry.  Maybe let us do 
this way. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Make your – give me your answer to 
what Mr Khoza is saying about your version and then once 
you have given me the answer you can say in support of 
10 
this answer, if we go to this document or that document 
you will find that it supports my answer by saying a, b, c, 
d.  Maybe it will be easy to follow it like that. 
DR NTETA:   Okay, alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words give your answer without 
going to the document first to say this is my response and 
then you say this document here, there is a document that 
supports what I am saying and this is the document and 
this is how it supports me. 
DR NTETA:   Okay.  So my response to Mr Khoza saying 
20 
that if there was a requirement for coal he finds it strange 
that Tegeta would then come and offer us coal and we 
would not be looking for coal.  My response is that we were 
looking for coal and looking for coal is in different forms.  
Some of it is where a supplier will come and say I have 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 121 of 193 
 
coal.  Particularly if their contract is expiring and there is a 
need to – and they have coal available.  So we were 
looking for coal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, oaky. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess that Mr Khoza’s point – 
and I say nothing about its merits, I am just saying his 
point seems to be not necessarily that you were not 
looking for coal generally speaking but that you were not 
the ones who went to Tegeta and said have you got coal for 
10 
us?  So but based on what you are saying I think your 
answer would be yes, we are not the ones who approached 
Tegeta, they approached us. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am not – I have not looked at Mr 
Khoza’s affidavit, I am not sure that his point connects 
properly because if we are in need of coal and somebody 
happens to be in need of a contract with us, we are looking 
for coal, we are looking for somebody who can sell us coal, 
somebody is looking for a – somebody who needs coal and 
20 
they approach us, why is it a big issue but I maybe missing 
something because I have not looked, refresh my memory 
on his affidavit but he might be able to say that there is 
something that I may be missing in his point. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I think the emphasis in his 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 122 of 193 
 
affidavit is about what was communicated to them or to him 
in person prior to the submission being made to the BTC 
and he says we were approached on the basis that Tegeta 
wants to supply coal but it turns out that they wanted a 
prepayment, so he makes this two points that on the one 
hand, if you say there was a shortfall, you do not seem to 
have taken the initiative to approach them, they are the 
ones who came to you and, on the other hand, we were 
told it is for coal but now the submission says it is for 
prepayment and he distinguishes between the two.  So we 
10 
were on the first leg of it and I hear what the Chairperson 
is saying.  I may have to read from his affidavit, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You see, I can understand if he 
has 
a 
concern 
that 
they 
were 
not 
told 
about 
the 
prepayment requirement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Up t whatever time or they were never 
told at all, that I can understand, but I think that is 
separate point. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one about it was not Eskom who 
approached Tegeta, I am not sure that I follow it.  But if 
maybe later on you have a look and you think there is 
something in it then maybe you could try again, you could 
revise it. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 123 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may have refreshed your memory 
recently and you – but I am just saying that, I mean, if you 
have need for coal and somebody needs a buyer of coal 
you might, you know, it is easy to see how it could happen.  
You know, somebody phones you and say I have got coal, 
you say oh, you know, it is as if you knew my situation, I 
actually need coal right now, I need it yesterday, let us talk 
about money, you know? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  I think, Chairperson, we should 
10 
look at it against the backdrop of what was happening at a 
time, Dr Nteta, because Tegeta was already having short 
term contracts with Eskom from January 2016 and the 
second one in February 2016 which was going to expire is 
it the 15 or the 18 April 2016? 
DR NTETA:   I actually think it is either the 13 or the 16 
April, so let us settle on the 16 t h, that is on common date 
that we have but… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:  I am not sure.  I think it is the 16 t h, ja, 
20 
because you think it is the 18 t h. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So these were contracts that were 
short term, already Tegeta buying from OCM to supply to 
Eskom at Arnot power station, correct?  Speak out, if you 
can speak out? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 124 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so those were already the two contracts 
that they had, yes.  I am not sure I heard the question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, those were the two contracts that 
Tegeta had with Eskom and then you have this time around  
- and, you see, there are various reasons given why Tegeta 
made the approach.  One of the reasons is that Tegeta 
wanted an extension of the contract. 
DR NTETA:   Correct.  I am not sure if you are frozen or if 
you asked me a question that I did not understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to comment on that? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, you confirm that that is one of the 
reasons why Tegeta – or was given, as Tegeta approaching 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was given by whom? 
DR NTETA:   Ja, so one of the reasons for… 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, you in your submission 
…[intervenes] 
DR NTETA:   Can I ask you to repeat the question please? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, we are repeating it.  The 
technology is too slow.  In your submission to the BTC you 
20 
gave as a reason for the submission that Tegeta wanted to 
extend the existing contract. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So on the one hand that is the reason 
given and on the other hand, which is now a different 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 125 of 193 
 
aspect altogether, the focus of our inquiry as well is that 
you requested that the prepayment be made to Tegeta in 
that submission. 
DR NTETA:   So the supplier was looking to – I think there 
is a delay, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, we – the technology is giving us a 
problem but I want to say, Mr Seleka, where what you say 
to her is not in the form of a question, you want her to 
comment, just make it clear that you are asking her to 
comment. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because sometimes she is not sure 
whether you expect her to say anything or whether you are 
still continuing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Dr Nteta, I will 
make it clear to you.  So the submission also included the 
issue of a prepayment request by the supplier.  Can you 
comment on that or shall I say you confirm that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  Yes, the submission also spoke to a 
prepayment. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:     Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   May I just ask this question, not about 
your evidence, are you able to see the evidence leader 
from where you are, Dr Nteta?   Because that might be 
causing the problem because …[intervenes] 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 126 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you are able to see him? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So what happens which maybe we can 
solve is that I see him after a while.  Like, for example, I 
see my screen of myself talking and then if you talk it 
would move to you and then it slowly gets to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so it takes some time so you cannot 
always tell whether he is done with the question of 
comment, then you have to wait until there is some silence, 
then you think, okay, he is done then you start answering 
10 
but in the meantime that can be quite a delay. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The technicians, do they hear that, can 
they try and sort that out please?  Okay, alright, let us 
continue, I am hoping the technicians heard that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that they try and sort it out. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Dr Nteta, I just want 
to read these passages from Dr Khoza’s affidavit so that I 
can expedite the process.  Chairperson, it is in Eskom 
20 
bundle 14, 14(A) on page 422.13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat the page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   422.13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I would like to read from 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 127 of 193 
 
paragraph 57 to 59.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, go ahead if Dr Nteta is ready.  Have 
you found it Dr Nteta? 
DR NTETA:   You can go ahead, I am getting there but I 
will listen to what you are saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So in his affidavit Mr Khoza 
writes, paragraph 57: 
“I have taken note of Nteta’s affidavit and I wish to 
point out that at paragraph 8.3 of her affidavit she 
10 
states that she was approached by Tegeta in early 
April 2018 with an offer to supply coal to Eskom 
from OCM.” 
He then goes on to state that: 
“In subsequent discussions with Tegeta she was 
advised that Tegeta would require a prepayment for 
the coal.  This version must be contrasted with the 
board submission which I received which essentially 
indicated that there was an urgent need to secure 
coal to avoid load shedding.  From Nteta’s affidavit 
20 
it is clear that the request for a prepayment 
followed the unsolicited bid which Tegeta made to 
Nteta.  It was not Eskom which required coal and 
then approached Tegeta which stated coal can only 
be extended if a prepayment is made.  It appears 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 128 of 193 
 
that it is Tegeta that approached Nteta.  Nteta’s 
affidavit suggests a series of events leading up to 
11 April 2016 which differs from the submission 
which Daniels and Nteta prepared for the board 
which they sent to me and other board members on 
11 April 2016.” 
So what he is saying is, what you are stating in your 
affidavit, it is a version different from what was contained 
in the submission to the board, I mean to the BTC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before Dr Nteta answers, in what way 
10 
does Mr Khoza say the two versions are different? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 57, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    He says he has read the affidavit, 
paragraph 8.3 of Dr Nteta, she then goes on to state that 
in the subsequent discussions with Tegeta she was advised 
that Tegeta would require prepayment.  Then he says this 
version must be contrasted with the Board submission 
which I received, which essentially indicated that there was 
an urgent need to secure coal.   So ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but it is the same point we – I think I 
raised earlier on, I don’t see the point ...[intervenes]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, he is dealing with two aspects 
here Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 129 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   One is the issue of the prepayment 
and the other is what the Chairperson has in mind which is 
who approaches – who approached who first, which is what 
comes in paragraph 58. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
about 
the 
one 
about 
who 
approaches who first. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m not sure that I see what’s important 
about who approached who first unless there is something 
else, otherwise it’s taken us too much time to try and figure 
10 
out what his point is on that, and what is the other point he 
is making? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, which is what I want to move on 
to, the prepayment requirement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think move on to that one. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so there – in the end the 
prepayment requirements, Ms Nteta, which Mr Khoza says, 
that request should be contrasted with what had been 
20 
given to them as the BTC and you will recall in one of the 
paragraphs, 
he 
says, 
the 
prepayment 
was, 
in 
fact, 
underplayed, it was kind of hidden away from the Board 
and not made the dominant feature of that submission.  So, 
Chairperson, if I may, that’s paragraph 46 of his affidavit, 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 130 of 193 
 
so 
you’ll 
go 
to 
page 
– 
let’s 
do 
pages 
backwards…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He suggests that the submission that Dr 
Nteta prepared for the BTC made no reference to a pre-
requirement of a pre-payment? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, that it was diminished, so it was 
made an insignificant aspect of the submissions.  You’ll 
see in the paragraph I’m about to refer to Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let’s go to – let’s go to the 
paragraph and the submission. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Paragraph 46, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean that is of his affidavit? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says what you have told me already, 
isn’t it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let’s go to the submission, let me 
see this point of Dr Nteta hiding the issue of the 
prepayment. 
DR NTETA:   I take exception to that Chair, that I was 
20 
hiding it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Laughter], well, maybe I’m attributing to 
Mr Khoza, a verb that he did not use – the submission, was 
it page 190 of which Bundle? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s in the Tegeta reference Bundle 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 131 of 193 
 
Chairperson, not …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you find it, you can just read to me 
and tell me whereabouts it is and why anybody would say 
it’s hidden if it is there, if it there in black and white. 
DR NTETA:   Chairperson, are they sanitising those 
documents before they give them to you? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I sanitise them myself, but I think 
they do sanitise them too, I sanitise them myself as well, 
you’re very concerned about that.  No, I sanitise them 
quite a lot if you have noticed. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Sorry Chair, Eskom Bundle 18(A) page 
297. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 2? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 297 – no, no those are the 
minutes, page 292. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 292, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, 292? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   292, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The other one is the minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I’m putting to Dr Nteta what the 
Chairperson of the BTC said, he understood the matter to 
be. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 132 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we are coming to this document 
because I want to – we want to see where prepayment is 
mentioned of hiding it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the prepayment is dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where is it mentioned? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is mentioned, Chairperson you’re on 
page 292, turn to page 293, the paragraph just above 3.2 it 
starts with, both suppliers have indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, why is that hiding it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That’s not me Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well – but you are putting to Dr Nteta, 
Mr Khoza’s point. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And what’s the ultimate point if she put 
it in a paragraph that he would not have put it at, is Dr 
Nteta’s document not his, maybe he would have put it in 
the first paragraph, so really it doesn’t seem to matter to 
me? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, what he’s saying is, Chair, in that 
paragraph I refer the Chairperson, he says, 
20 
“Significantly the information I received prior to 11 
April 2016 meeting was that an extension to a 
contract was needed. Not that R659million was 
required to be prepaid to Tegeta.  In hindsight, this 
appears 
to 
show 
that 
the 
significance 
of 
a 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 133 of 193 
 
prepayment to Tegeta was diminished and hidden 
from the Board as it only appears as an ancillary an 
immaterial aspect in the resolution”. 
 
That’s his version Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I don’t think we should spend too 
much time on that version, let’s move on.  You really have 
to have very poignant reasons to say that somebody, you 
know, where they chose to mention a point in their 
document, they chose that part of the document because 
they had ulterior motives to hide the point or to lessen the 
10 
chances that you’d see the point.  You’d need to have, 
really very poignant. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja and that seems to be the gist of 
these submissions in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is your take on it? 
DR NTETA:   Is the question being posed to me or to the 
evidence leader? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no the evidence leader. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It’s posed to me. 
DR NTETA:   Thank you. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have taken the view, Chairperson, 
that the request is not necessarily hidden but I think to 
some extent it is diminished as Mr Khoza says.  So, it is 
not made the predominant feature of the submission and – 
but ultimately the BTC did talk about a prepayment in its 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 134 of 193 
 
deliberation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I would have thought that if you had 
five points you wanted to pursue in his version if that was 
going to be a point or it might be a last point.  So, I think, 
please let’s look at more important points that – ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, because, I mean, ultimately the – 
in the telephone conference members of the BTC did ask 
about the prepayment.  So, even if the submission 
downplayed it, it ultimately became – it was brought to the 
fore. Now, Dr Nteta, you talk about the urgency of this 
10 
matter, you deal with that in your affidavit there was a BTC 
meeting scheduled for the 13 t h of April 2016, why did this 
meeting have to take place at 9 o’clock at night on the 11 t h 
of April 2016? 
DR NTETA:   I will provide my opinion. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   But I think the Chairperson of the BTC will 
have to answer that question.  In my opinion, and I’ve 
indicated in my affidavit, there is no reason why the 
submission could not have started on the 13 t h of April. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, so you are saying to the 
Chairperson, you could comfortably have placed this thing 
on the agenda of BTC on the 13 t h? 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Then, I would like 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 135 of 193 
 
to…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, one of the points that I’m 
interested in that Mr Khoza made, if I recall correctly in his 
evidence, really was that, if I recall correctly, he suggested 
that 
Dr 
Nteta 
must 
have 
been 
involved 
with 
the 
arrangement of the meeting as well as the issues to be 
discussed at the meeting of 11, I think much more than he 
thought she makes it out to be.  I can’t remember the exact 
point but there was a suggestion – he implied that Dr Nteta 
must have been party to knowledge of what was being 
10 
done.  I think he suggested that Dr Nteta seems to have 
worked with Ms Daniels or something or somebody about 
the arrangements to have this BTC meeting on the 11 t h.  I 
may be misrepresenting what he said, but I understood him 
to be saying, Dr Nteta has not handed in her evidence 
about what she knew about arrangement to have the BTC 
meeting take place in the evening of the 11 t h, she was 
working with Ms Daniels to achieve that.  Do you have any 
recollection of something along these lines? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have and I’m at the paragraphs 
20 
relevant to that point, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay that’s quite – on the face of it 
that is an important issue to look at ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, that’s on page – Eskom 
Bundle 14(A) page 422.14. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 136 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, I’ve got that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   From paragraph 62 I will read it Chair, 
it says, 
“I also raise – and it relates to this, whether the 
meeting could take place on the 11 t h or the 13 t h – I 
also raise issue with the fact that, Nteta innocently 
suggested, paragraph 8.14, that it is not clear to me 
the reason for the BTC sitting on 11 April 2016 as, 
in my opinion, the prepayment submission could 
have been deliberated at the BTC meeting on 13 
10 
April 2016.  This is extremely deceitful of Nteta to 
say since she was working on the 11 April 2016 
submission until the late hours of 10 April 2016 and 
the very same draft submission which she attaches 
to her affidavit which she emailed to Daniels, 
displays an 11 2016 BTC meeting date.  Paragraph 
63 had there not been collusion between Daniels 
and Nteta, the company secretary, Daniels would no 
doubt have told her and the other BTC members 
that the matter could have been dealt with on 13 
20 
April 
2016 
and 
not 
11 
April 
2016 
as 
they 
orchestrated.  Furthermore, logically,  had they not 
intended to cause the BTC to sit on 11 April 2016 
they would have prepared the submission document 
only from 11 April 2016 onwards and sent it to the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 137 of 193 
 
BTC via email as an addition to the 13 April 2016 
submission”. 
 
Then he goes on to deal with another point, I think 
that’s…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think we should give Dr Nteta an 
opportunity to deal with the suggestion by Mr Khoza that 
he she was being deceitful. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Alluded in August. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you want to say something about 
what Mr Khoza is saying, Dr Nteta? 
10 
DR NTETA:   Chairperson, thank you very much I actually 
have plenty to say about what Mr Khoza is saying but I will 
not go into the detail because I understand that – I would 
like this to be my last appearance.  Mr Khoza has made 
some very sweeping un-based allegations with regards to 
me being instrumental in setting a date and time for a BTC 
meeting.  Mr Khoza is the Chairperson of the Board Tender 
Committee, he’s a Board member.  At the time I was a 
procurement official who is tasked with getting submissions 
– 
putting 
submissions 
together. 
 
Where 
I 
sat 
is 
a 
20 
procurement official, I reported to one level, which is a 
Senior General Manager within TED, that Senior General 
Manager reported into a Group Executive, that Group 
Executive reported into a CEO and that CEO reported into 
the Board. I provide this context so that we can – to allow 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 138 of 193 
 
you to see that the ability for me to then instruct Board 
Members of Eskom to sit and deliberate on a transaction is 
very unlikely, particularly in the hierarchical nature of 
Eskom, so that’s one.  I never engaged with Mr Khoza at 
any point with regards to the submission except for when I 
entered the room or the BTC. So, I’m not too sure how I 
would have convinced him to have that meeting.  Secondly 
the instruction of BTC sitting, we receive it as procurement 
officials, we cannot indicate when it must be, we are simply 
told, your submission is going to be heard on this date and 
10 
at this time.  My affidavit indicates that, unfortunately, I am 
not sure if whether it was Mr Magelani or Ms Suzanne 
Daniels who then informed me as to when the BTC sitting 
is.  They are the two people who would inform a 
procurement official as to when a sitting is at, so that’s to 
answer his first sweeping unbiased – I mean very biased 
statements that he has made about me.  The second 
element where he’s talking about working with Ms Daniels, 
he is correct that I sought her assistance with this 
transaction. My affidavit indicates that because I was not 
20 
sure in terms of prepayment and how to handle it, I 
requested my seniors to assist me in putting together the 
submission.  So, I worked with her, I did not collude with 
her, I worked with her so that she can assist me.  Similarly, 
I worked with Mr Magelani; similarly I worked with Mr Koko 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 139 of 193 
 
and Mr Mbongo to get the submission together.  So, I take 
great offence to his statement, I further take offence to his 
statement that he says that I hid the submission, it is 
resolution 2 that talks to prepayment.  I’m going to stop 
here because my father raised me right. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Yes, Dr Nteta if we 
may please go through the submission quickly.  The 
submission is in Eskom Bundle 18(A) page 292. 
DR NTETA:   Page 292? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Eskom Bundle 18. 
10 
DR NTETA:   Thank you, I’m getting to that page apologies 
for the delay, I’m at the submission. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, the submission – the summary of 
facts – salient facts,  paragraph 3 you see that and 3.1? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   On the first page of the submission. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Under salient facts it reads, 
“The requirements for the supply of contract coal 
originates 
from 
the 
April 
2016 
supply 
20 
plan…[intervenes]”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka, I suggest that – with regard 
to the submission if you just go to the points that you seek 
to make about it without reading substantial parts of it, 
obviously you can read a particular part, but I just think 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 140 of 193 
 
that it’s important to just go to the points that you seek to 
make, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, this is one of them, thank you, I 
accept the Chairperson’s guidance there.  It says, 
“The requirements for the supply of contract coal 
originates from the April 2016 supply plan as 
presented at the Primary Energy Technical Control 
Centre of 8 April 2016.  It was identified that supply 
to Arnot will be inadequate to meet the burn 
requirements of the power station over the winter 
10 
months and that there is an urgent need for 
additional coal. This identified requirement is as a 
result of the need to build up stock days over a 
short period while the RFP, request for proposal for 
Arnot is being finalised.  This shortfall of supply 
amounts to approximately 2.1million tons”, 
 
And it goes on to talk about at present, the RFP’s 
and – it’s in the negotiation phase.  Dr Nteta we – you  
were 
seeking 
to 
take 
the 
Chairperson 
through 
this 
Technical Control Centre meeting, could you tell the 
20 
Chairperson, in regard to this paragraph that I’ve read 
about the urgent need for coal in the winter months, 
whether this statement was supported by the supply plan of 
April 2016? 
DR NTETA:   I’m going to take you through – yes, I was 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 141 of 193 
 
going to take you to that particular Tactical Control Centre 
meeting and one of the elements I was going to take you 
through was the bullet point in terms of bullet point number 
11 where I was requested, in terms of myself and my team 
to come up with proposals and plans by close of business 
on Monday.  Now, in that particular Tactical Procurement 
meeting I’m going to relate to…[intervenes]. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can I – yes because I’m asking a 
different question.  My question is whether…[intervenes]. 
DR NTETA:   I think I know what you’re asking. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, okay, let me repeat it for the 
benefit of the Chairperson.  The April 2016 supply plans, 
whether the statement made here that there would be a 
shortfall over the winter months, whether that statement 
was supported by the April 2016 supply plan? 
DR NTETA:   I’m going to say no, because I think I know 
where you are going. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, Chair I’m moving…[intervenes]. 
DR NTETA:   Would you like me to elaborate? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you know that – the fact that you 
20 
say, you’re going to say no doesn’t mean it’s not your 
answer, so it is your answer.  To say, I’m going to say no 
doesn’t change anything, your answer is no, is that – you 
understand that? 
DR NTETA:   I wanted to elaborate but I’ve opted not to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 142 of 193 
 
elaborate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
DR NTETA:   Ja, continue evidence leader, as you lead my 
evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Thank you.  Then it says – I’m reading 
the paragraph which reads, 
“The current short-term portfolio consists of two 
suppliers 
namely 
Umzimbiti 
Mining 
and Tegeta 
Exploration and Resources”, 
 
You see that? 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I understand it to be your evidence 
that there were more than – well many suppliers to Arnot 
Power Station, correct? 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was not only Umzimbiti and Tegeta? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, there were other suppliers that were 
contracted already, so these were the two that were – 
pardon? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And supplying coal – contracted and 
20 
supplying coal to Arnot? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, there were others that we were looking 
at who were contracted and supplying coal some of them 
we hadn’t even done box counts. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Now, can you recall how did Umzimbiti 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 143 of 193 
 
get to be incorporated into this submission? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I can. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, please tell the Chairperson.  
DR NTETA:   Okay, so in the course of the day of the 11 t h 
of April, I – as I indicated, I’d been consulting quite a bit 
with my seniors and Mr Magelani then – it got incorporate 
after the discussion that I had with Mr Magelani where he 
asked me about Umzimbiti Coal in terms of when their 
contract is coming to an end and then indicate that I 
should put Umzimbiti in the submission.  I should get the 
10 
volumes and – etcetera. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So, Umzimbiti had not approached you 
for an extension? 
DR NTETA:   So, they hadn’t approached me – ja they 
hadn’t approached me directly for an extension, they had 
discussions with the – in terms of the coal operations team 
because they were concerned about – so the coal contracts 
look at period in terms of time period as well as volumes. 
So, their time period was going to expire before they had 
completed their volumes so they had indicated that to the 
20 
coal operations team and so they had approached Eskom. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay, is that your answer now, that 
they had approached Eskom for an extension? 
DR NTETA:   They had spoken to the coal operations yes if 
that makes sense.  So, they hadn’t approached myself they 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 144 of 193 
 
were just being a concern that we are not going to make 
our volumes because they had issues, but they hadn’t 
approached me directly. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja I am not sure ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:  But – but when I say – when I say approach I do 
not want to make is similar to the Tegeta approach because 
that was directly as the coal.  It was more in just in terms of 
I rather say it is their – they were engaging with the coal – 
with the contract’s manager. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes okay.  Let me ask my question… 
10 
DR NTETA:  Let me put it that way. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Differently. 
DR NTETA:  In terms of the managing of the contract. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes let me ask my question differently 
because you are saying it was Mr Edwin Mabelane who 
asked you to incorporate Umsimbithi in the submission. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  My question was do you know – you 
20 
personally that Umsimbithi had asked for an extension of the 
contract? 
DR NTETA:  So when Mr Mabelane spoke to me at the time I 
did not know whether they had specifically asked when he 
asked me at the time.  But in my way back because one of 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 145 of 193 
 
the things that he had asked me to do is to get the volumes 
that they were currently supplying you know in just more 
detail about their contract.  
 
So in my engagement where I would get that 
information would be from the coal operations person who is 
managing that particular contract.  Have I answered your 
question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No, no you have not.  But I want to move 
on.  But you have not answered that question.  Is it a yes or 
a no?  Is it a yes or no?   
10 
DR NTETA:  So I think? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did you know personally that they asked 
for an extension? 
DR NTETA:  At the time no.  No. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay I want to go to the next page of the 
submissions. 
DR NTETA:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 293.  Page 293 under the sentence 
the benefits for extending these short term contracts include.  
Then you will recall that I said this was exactly one of the 
20 
reasons given in the submissions that it was an extension of 
the existing contract.  So you see they had the benefits for 
extending these short term contracts include... 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Include bullet 1. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 146 of 193 
 
“The 
coal 
is 
being 
mined 
and 
can 
be 
delivered without delay.” 
You see that? 
DR NTETA:  Yes I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC: Was this correct? 
DR NTETA:  So yes it was correct in the sense that the coal 
was being mined.  I have reflected in terms of that particular 
statement and reflecting in terms of what is understood this 
is what I understood. 
 
So in saying that the coal was being mined because 
10 
the – I was trying to put in relation to that it is an – their 
operational mines and perhaps in hindsight I should have 
said these are operational mines. Because we always looked 
at in terms of just the contrast of an operational mine and 
not an operational mine. 
 
So it just means that if it is an operational mine we 
can then get the coal sooner than not.  But in hindsight 
having looked in terms of what the statement says and what 
a person outside of coal operations would understand it – ja 
it is – it means something different. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes okay.  I was struggling to follow your 
answer there.  The question is, you – it is stated here as one 
of the benefits.  It says: 
“The 
coal 
is 
being 
mined 
and 
can 
be 
delivered without delay.” 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 147 of 193 
 
And my question was was that factually correct? 
DR NTETA:  So –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well she said the … 
DR NTETA:  My understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The coal is being mined part is correct but 
I think… 
DR NTETA:  Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you said Dr Nteta that the part that 
says the coal is being mined is correct but you seem to 
concede that the second part that the coal can be delivered 
10 
without delay you seem to concede that it was not correct.  
Is that – is my understanding correct? 
DR NTETA:  Yes in terms of that ja.  There would be – there 
will be a delay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  It would not be available the next.  It is – ja so 
it would not be available the next day. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be available in a month’s time? 
DR NTETA:  Yes it would be available in a month’s time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay in two weeks’ time?  Would it have 
been available in two weeks’ time? 
DR NTETA:  Yes it probably would be available in two weeks’ 
time yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Seleka. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 148 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now if to the extent 
that you say that – okay let me deal with the first part.  You 
saying the first part is correct that coal is being mined.  Now 
let me read to you that paragraph regarding the pre-payment 
which is just above paragraph 3.2 key assumptions is above 
that Chairperson.  It says: 
“Both 
suppliers 
have 
indicated 
the 
willingness 
to 
extend 
current 
contracts 
however Tegeta has requested that Eskom 
considers 
some 
formal 
pre-payment 
to 
10 
enable 
it 
to 
meet 
the 
production 
requirements from the export component of 
the mine in lieu of the fact that it subsidises 
the direct feed of Hendrina Power and this 
will 
enable 
it 
to 
meet 
the 
coal 
supply 
demands for the two power stations in the 
short term.” 
 
Now the pre-payment is required as we read here in 
order for Tegeta to – to – you have said to reopen its export 
component of the mine.  How do we reconcile that statement 
20 
with what you say is a correct portion of that sentence the 
coal is being mined? 
DR NTETA:  So to reconcile the two on the – the reason why 
I said the coal is being mined I was speaking to in terms of 
the site of the operations. So the site in terms of where 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 149 of 193 
 
Tegeta was getting the coal, coal was being mined.  The site 
where Umsimbithi was getting the coal, coal was being 
mined.   
They were having difficulty in the sense that they 
were not able to get to their hundred percent operation and 
we were getting trickles of coal from them.  So that is why I 
am saying to you that the statement that I made was in terms 
of the coal is being mined it is correct.   
The element in terms of the delay because the delay 
would then be because they would need to now start their 
10 
production operation in terms of the beneficiation part of that 
particular coal that is being mined so that it meets our 
particular stack.  So that is how I reconciled the two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes but we have to understand this in 
the way in which it was presented to the BTC and the 
Chairperson of BTC says. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The Chairperson of BTC says we have 
been told unless we approve this deal there will be load 
shedding.  Coal is required immediately.  It is an urgent 
20 
situation.  But the pre-payment request is made in order to 
explore or reopen the export component of the mine that had 
been closed by OCM. 
DR NTETA:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So mining there is not taking place. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 150 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  Mining was taking place at OCM in terms of the 
– the mine operations mining was taking place.  When the 
opening the export operations and my understanding was 
that there would be – it is opening up an export operations 
so that they can begin to beneficiate that coal so that then 
meets the grade that we are looking at.   
So that – that part needed still to be opened.  I am 
not sure if I am – I am coming clear.  So that was my 
understanding of that one statement in the submissions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja well I have – I think you can sense it 
10 
is not particularly clear or coming out particularly clear.  Did 
Umsimbithi require a pre-payment? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  Pardon. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Did Umsimbithi require a pre-payment? 
DR NTETA:  Umsimbithi did not require a pre-payment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And Umsimbithi could not deliver 
immediately? 
DR NTETA:  Umzimbithi’s issues were different in terms of 
their ability to deliver immediately.  They were not able to – 
when I talk about the delay is because they were having an 
20 
industrial strike which was limiting their capacity to deliver 
the full volumes that they were due to deliver to us. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes – ja just give a direct … 
DR NTETA:  They did not – they did not require pre-
payment. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 151 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes but give a direct answer.  Could they 
deliver immediately? 
DR NTETA:  Yes they could deliver immediately not the 
required volumes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Let us go – now tell the 
Chairperson how you – how do we reconcile the two?  If you 
go to the first page of the submissions. 
DR NTETA:  Pardon sorry can I ask you to start – can I ask 
you to start your sentence again because I lost you?  Thank 
you. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay your – your answer is that they 
could deliver immediately but not the require volumes – 
Umsimbithi.  Is that your answer to my question? 
DR NTETA:  Evidence leader can I respond?  I have noted 
that you are taking me through line by line of the 
submissions and I want to also note to you that the 
submission was prepared based on a lot of inputs. 
 
If looking at line by line it may not – in hindsight you 
can take it apart and say it is not clear and that I will – that I 
will concede to.  My understanding of the submission and 
20 
that line that we are looking at in the submission is talking to 
whether 
the 
coal 
can 
get 
there 
immediately 
or 
not 
immediately and I concede that that is – that particular line 
in the submission is not clear.   
So Umzimbithi at the time was supplying coal but 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 152 of 193 
 
very limited amounts and quite erratically.  So it is correct 
that it was not – I should not have said without delay 
because it would depend on when the strike is over.  So they 
were supplying but not the required amounts and yes that 
one line it is my understanding and someone else’s is very 
different and I concede to that. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well I am not sure whether it is a 
question of it is unclear or not so clear.  What I am testing 
with you it is a question of whether a statement made is 
factually correct.   That is really what I am testing with you.  
10 
When you say coal was being mined and it will be delivered 
immediately is it – that is to me so clear.  I understand you 
to say what it means is clear to me but what I am saying to 
you is was that factually correct?  That is a different 
question. 
DR NTETA:  The statement – I am saying in my opinion I felt 
it was correct where it was saying without delay.  Now the 
issue is what is that delay?  So I believe that it was correct 
but the question now we are asking in hindsight is that where 
was it?  Tomorrow it is available and I am saying to you 
20 
tomorrow, the next day the coal was not going to be 
available.  But in a few weeks it would be available. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  But then the BTC would have been 
misled. 
DR NTETA:  And I am – and I am conceding. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 153 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  I do not think the BTC would have been misled 
and in the statement. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I have… 
DR NTETA:  The second thing is that what I want to indicate 
– sorry. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Let me finalise why my statement but 
before I finalise it you were about to say to the Chairperson 
you are conceding – just quickly on that finalise it? 
DR NTETA:  What I am conceding to is it – so what I was 
10 
saying I am conceding to in terms of the delivery without 
delay in the sense that I am conceding that yes it was not 
going to be available the next day – the coal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  That is what I am – I am conceding to and I am 
also conceding to that the statement there may not be clear 
which is very easy for us to look at in hindsight.  It is one 
line in the submission. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Now there were two aspects 
because if you concede that the coal was not going to be 
20 
immediately available or available without delay if you 
concede that is not correct then I am saying to you when one 
reads the affidavit of Mr Khoza who says: we were being told 
urgently make this decision otherwise there will be load 
shedding then the BTC was misled by that statement that 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 154 of 193 
 
coal will be made available without delay. 
DR NTETA:  Advocate Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  The BTC submission is a four page document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
DR NTETA:  If you – if Mr Khoza is saying that because of 
one sentence in a four page document the BTC in totality 
was misled then I find that very difficult to say so – to agree 
to because in providing that particular document there are 
other statements that are in there that are correct.   
10 
And if there was a bit of issue in terms of like you 
were asking me now in terms of can you unpack the 
statement they are entitled and they do in the deliberation to 
ask us in terms of what does this statement mean and then 
we can provide clarity.  So I – I have difficulty in saying that 
the BTC was misled because of one line in a four page 
document. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay the second point. 
DR NTETA:  As Mr Khoza is implying. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  The second point. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well just one second.  I can understand 
your point Doctor Nteta when you say if the BTC wanted to 
make enquiries with you as to what is meant by a particular 
line like without delay you were available.  Because I think 
that is the point you make, is that correct?  That is one of 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 155 of 193 
 
the points you make.  Is that correct? 
DR NTETA:  Yes because the document sits and – yes it is 
correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that point I can understand if that is 
factually correct even though they would obviously ask if 
they were not sure what it means a particular sentence.  But 
if they believed that it was clear obviously they would not 
bother to ask and they would act on the – on their 
understanding of what it means.   
If they understood without delay to mean the moment 
10 
the contract is signed or the pre-payment is made the 
following day coal can be delivered that would be an 
understanding that is justified I would imagine by the 
statement that says without delay.   
But it may well be that within the context that was 
known to you and or Eskom or to the BTC it may well be that 
without delay could not or should not have been understood 
to be like the following day but maybe it should be 
understood to be certainly within a week or more than that I 
am not sure.   
20 
That I can understand but with regard to the point 
you make that in effect you do not understand why they 
would be misled by one sentence in a four page document I 
am not sure that I understand that.  One – one sentence in a 
four page document can be very important and can relate to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 156 of 193 
 
a very material point and it can be misleading.   
But if you say to me if they read that sentence in the 
context of the whole document then they would not be 
justified in giving it a certain meaning then I can understand.  
But then you should be able to say but when you go to page 
4 you can see that what was said in page 4 in effect qualifies 
what was said in that statement two pages earlier because if 
you read it – read what is said at page 4 it could not – the 
sentence could not mean – could not be understood to mean 
delivery of coal the following day then I would understand.  
10 
You understand where my concern is? 
DR NTETA:  Yes Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you want to say something? 
DR NTETA:  And – and – I am in agreement with you yes 
Chairperson I am in agreement with you and in fact prior to 
you beginning to – to provide this context which I appreciate.  
I was also going to say that when you look in the context of 
the document – the full document there is a statement that is 
made as well that says on the page before talks about 
Umsimbithi.  There is an industrial action and should the – I 
20 
will read it to you it says: 
“The current contract supply will then be 
depleted 
around 
June 
2016 
should 
the 
industrial action be stemmed and full mining 
operations resumes.” 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 157 of 193 
 
So when you look at it in terms of the full context of the 
document for me I would then understand that they would – 
would – maybe would ask as to – but Ayanda you have made 
a statement in this document here that says without delay 
but you are telling me about an industrial strike.  So what – 
what is the – how long and what is the delay?  Or Ayanda 
you are saying to me that it is without delay but we then – 
Tegeta they need to start up their operations. So what do 
you mean?  So for me I am – all I am saying is that they had 
the opportunity to ask these questions and these are very 
10 
relevant questions but looking in terms of the full context of 
the document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I might say that I am keen that we move 
on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because we have been on this submission 
for a very long time. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But obviously important points must be 
covered but I think. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We need to – to move to – move on 
otherwise we spend the whole time to be on the submission. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 158 of 193 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes, ja the submission Chair is really the 
last part of Dr Nteta’s evidence.  The ones we have com – 
finished the submission we will be reaching the end of her 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja Dr Nteta indeed the paragraph you are 
referring to which is on page 1 of that submission document 
at the bottom of the page Chairperson that is Eskom Bundle 
18 page 28 – 292 reads that: 
“Umsimbithi is contracted to supply Arnot 
10 
with 
540 000 
tons 
and 
is 
currently 
underperforming due to protracted industrial 
action.  The current contract supply will then 
be depleted in and around June 2016 should 
the industrial action be stemmed and full 
mining operations resumed.  The supplier 
indicated the willingness to extend from July 
2016 until September 2016 on similar terms 
and conditions.” 
So you see because I am looking at this with the – well I am 
20 
looking at it but really putting to you the version of the 
Chairperson of BTC insofar as he says the impression they 
were brought under by the explanation is that unless you 
agree there will be load shedding.  But I think you have 
traversed that.  I can move on unless if you want to comment 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 159 of 193 
 
on it before I move on. 
DR NTETA:  I have got no comment on that I think he must 
answer what does he mean by the impression that he – that 
he got and from whom did he get the impression.  I have too 
many questions for that statement to provide a comment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay.  Thank you.  Now we know that in 
the – in the – well please tell the Chairperson you – when 
you starting drafting the submission you had not received a 
written offer from Mr Nath.   
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I want you to – yes.  I want you please to 
tell the Chairperson when do you – whether you ever 
received a written offer – when do you receive it and what 
were the terms of the written offer. 
DR NTETA:  So I received the written offer from Mr Nath on 
the 11t h of April 2016.  The reason why I received the written 
offer is because I contacted Mr Nath.  I contacted Mr Nath 
either on the – that Monday or on the Friday I cannot recall 
which of those two but for me that is immaterial as to the 
particular date.   
20 
But I contacted Mr Nath and I indicated to him that I 
need a written offer for the supply of coal because I had 
noted that we had been discussing this coal transaction 
since March but there was not a written offer.   
So I then asked him to please put the full written 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 160 of 193 
 
offer and send it to me and which was really just a sort of a 
culmination of what we had been discussing.  And that I 
received on the Monday.  I say I received it on the Monday 
based on the investigators indicating when I received it.   
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well Chairperson if I may assist you Dr 
Nteta Chairperson Eskom Bundle 14 page 226.  It is a – 
Bundle 14 – 14(A).  Page 226. 
DR NTETA:  226. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It is an email from Ravindra Nath Monday 
11 April 2016 at 16:28 sent to you Dr Nteta a draft 
10 
attachment document 1. 
“Hello Madam FYI regards R Nath.” 
Now this is in the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say Bundle 14(A) page 269? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 226. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Page 226 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think I am at 269.226.  I just need that 
first. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  14(A) 226.  It is an email from Ravindra 
20 
Nath on Monday 11 April 2016 at 16:28 to Dr Nteta the 
subject is draft the attachment is document 1. The email 
reads: 
“Hello Madam FYI regards R Nath” 
You see that Dr Nteta? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 161 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:  Yes I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  So by this time this is on Monday 
by this time you had engaged with your fellow colleagues 
that you have mentioned Suzanne Daniels, Edwin Mabelane, 
Mr Koko to put together a submission prior to you receiving a 
written offer from Mr Nath. 
DR NTETA:  Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So you have requested the written offer 
and you receive one but why – why did you not request it at 
a very first approach made to you by Mr Nath? 
10 
DR NTETA:  Quite frankly I forgot and generally what 
happens is that when you get – when suppliers come to us 
and discuss coal we initially have a discussion to see the 
feasibility etcetera.  And then when we do believe it is a little 
bit 
more 
feasible 
then 
we 
will 
then 
start 
putting 
documentation together.  
 
So when he first spoke to me about it I did not ask 
him at the time for the – of a letter. It was an oversight from 
my side. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. Fine well is it not astounding that 
20 
you set about to prepare a four page submission putting 
together the terms of a submission to BTC without having a 
written offer from the proposed supplier? 
DR NTETA:  It is – it is not unusual I will be frank with you it 
is not unusual but it is not best practice.  So when I said to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 162 of 193 
 
you I am not sure if I spoke to him on the Friday or the 
Monday asking for the offer – the written offer it could have 
been that it was on Friday and he only sent it Monday, but as 
I indicated asking for it at the very beginning was an 
oversight from myself.  We do put submissions together 
based on different offers, you know, in the discussion that 
may have had with suppliers.  Often times we would do that 
but it was an oversight.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Well, then the offer is on page 
227. 
10 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, before you go to page 227.  I think 
when you gave evidence the last time Dr Nteta, I have 
raised the same question also and it continues to come 
back because it just seems to me that if somebody 
approaches you as Eskom or any entity and says:  I would 
like to offer you coal.   
 
Before you – if you are not the decision maker or 
at least you take it to the relevant decision maker in 
writing, that you would say:  Please give me your offer.  
20 
Let me – give me your offer in writing.  Let me exactly what 
the terms and conditions are that you are looking at.  
Before you even begin to prepare something.   
 
One of the reasons why you do that, you do not 
want 
to 
misrepresent 
anything 
about 
the 
terms 
and 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 163 of 193 
 
conditions from the, you know. 
 
But two, you want to consider this offer yourself 
because 
you 
probably 
would 
need 
to 
make 
a 
recommendation to somebody or the person who has the 
power to make the decision or the structure.  And it does 
look awkward where you get to the trouble of preparing a 
four page submission without a written offer or at least a 
document from the supplier or potential supplier which just 
sets out some – the essential caps to say, to us these are 
the important terms. 
10 
 
If you have difficulty with any of these, then we 
can talk but these are the...  But I guess there is not much 
that you can add.  You have answered it the last time and 
you have just answered it now.  Is that correct? 
DR NTETA:   It is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Then the offer on 
page 227 Dr Nteta.  It is quite – well, I should say 
something about the time which is 16:28.   
 
And this is the time after Mr Howa, three o’clock 
20 
roundabout, has now been told by Mr Nath that the 
consortium of banks have declined their offer to either 
defer the payment of R 600 million or to offer them a 
bridging loan. 
 
Then you see this offer being made, 6:28.  Did you 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 164 of 193 
 
I fact request this offer to be made in writing? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, I did ask him to make the offer in writing 
because it is one of our requirements that you must the 
offer in writing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So it is in fact one of your 
requirements at Eskom? 
DR NTETA:   Ja, so – as I – so what I was saying to you 
that when I conceded I said it is not like this practise.  So 
what we generally do and it is not this practice, that we will 
engage the suppliers in coal.   
10 
 
We would actually get them to detail in terms of 
their costing and their costing modules before we even get 
an offer on the table because we want to interrogate in 
terms of the supply, into the coal that has been considered. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So we do that.  It is not best practice but one 
of the things we must in terms of our file is that you put 
what was the offer that came in at and if there are changes 
in terms of subsequent negotiations, we also provide that 
as well. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but if it is a requirement, as you 
say it is, a written offer, then it is no longer a matter of 
whether it is their practice or not, good or bad practise.  It 
is a matter of requirement by your employer. 
DR NTETA:   So it is in terms of...  Yes, because we talk 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 165 of 193 
 
about an unsolicited offer.  You must receive an unsolicited 
offer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So it is a requirement that we receive an 
offer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   So that is why I am saying, it is requirement 
that we get an offer. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but we are talking written offers. 
DR NTETA:   So.  Yes.  Well, to be frank with you.  I do not 
10 
have that particular section of the document with me 
whether it is written or it is not written. 
 
But what I am saying to you that it is best practice, 
that it is something that you have in writing but I cannot 
offhand off the cuff tell you whether it should be written or 
not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay. 
DR NTETA:   But I know that for me I wanted a written 
offer.  I just think it is best practise. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  The timing is remarkable.  The 
20 
timing of this email coming now with a written offer.  Here 
is the offer on page 227.  And the offer has a couple of 
points to it. 
 
It says: 
“Kindly refer to the discussion we had in this 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 166 of 193 
 
regard.” 
 
So this is Mr Nath writing to you.  You and him had 
discussions prior to him sending this offer.  Correct? 
DR NTETA:   Correct, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And his connection ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   So as I indicated to you...  Sorry.  Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In this connection, Tegeta Exploration 
and Resources, offers Eskom to supply additional 1.2 
million tons of coal from Optimum Coal Mine (Pty) Ltd over 
a period of five months.  Ja, so we have traversed that 
10 
issue about why could you not buy directly from OCM in 
buying from Tegeta.   
 
And the Chairperson also added the fact that it had 
at this time in April, Tegeta did not have a contract to 
supply such an amount of coal to you.  It did not have a 
contract with OCM to supply that amount of coal to Eskom. 
 
I do not know whether you knew or did not know 
about that? 
DR NTETA:   Whether I knew or did not know that they did 
not have a contract at the time? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   With OCM to supply 1.2 million tons of 
coal. 
DR NTETA:   So at that particular time, I do not know – I 
do not think I knew. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You do not think you knew? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 167 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Ja, I do not think.  I cannot recall to be 
honest with you.  I am just trying to remember. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It carries on. 
“For increasing the production of the mine and 
beneficiation 
thereof, 
we 
need 
funds 
for 
smooth execution of this contract.” 
 
But then you see the reason is different from your 
reason to the BTC of an urgency.  These are ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   My reason for the urgency of the BTC sitting? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Tegeta says they want funds(?) and 
10 
they say what the reason is: 
“Increasing the production of the mine and 
beneficiation thereof.” 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Did you tell the BTC this is why Tegeta 
wants the funds? 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  So if you look in terms of what I said to 
the BTC, I indicated to them it is for their operations.  Let 
me just try and get to the submission.  I am not sure if I am 
understanding the ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think if I recall correctly.  You 
said they wanted to revise their export operations.   
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That does not, on the face of it, seemed 
to be what they are saying here but you may take a 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 168 of 193 
 
different view.  I think in your submission to the BTC, you 
said they needed the money in order to revive their export 
operations.   
 
And I think that was your evidence but I do not 
read what they say here to be saying the same thing but 
you might give a different understanding. 
DR NTETA:   So I had a conversation with Mr Nath that we 
would like a prepayment.  He indicated that it is for the 
operations of the mine, you know, in the export portion of 
it.  I had that conversation.  Now in the letter it says from 
10 
increasing the production of the mine and beneficiation 
there.  With – now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   ...in the construction of the mine and 
beneficiation is part of mine operations because the – so I 
am not sure if I understand the portion that you are 
highlighting.  If you can just make that clear to me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, one might not understand how the 
mine was but there seems to have been two sections in 
terms of the operations, at least.  One for the export and 
20 
one for the domestic.  That is the impression that one gets. 
 
And they had the export section had challenges to 
the extent that it needed to be revised but Eskom was not 
going to get coal from the export section, I would imagine.  
t was going to get coal from the domestic section, I would 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 169 of 193 
 
imagine.   
 
But that is the impression that I have but you might 
say:  No, no.  It is not a correct understanding.  This is the 
position. 
 
On the face of it, it looks like they wanted money 
from Eskom to do something that was just going to give 
them more profit to boost a different section that had 
nothing to do with Eskom. 
DR NTETA:   So I am really – it just a perspective.  So the 
mine has an export – the mine is a mine – and this is my 
10 
understanding and it is my understanding. 
 
The mine has a mine.  It is mining coal.  The first 
coal that goes, it then goes to Hendrina and it is of a 
certain quality of coal.  I am going to say the 22. 
 
Now the export portion, that coal - what can 
happen is, to get it into a higher CV coal, it goes into a 
beneficiation so that it can then improve its calorific(?) 
value and things like that and then they would then export 
that coal. 
 
And that coal is generally of a better quality than 
20 
the Hendrina one.  So when they are saying in their 
statement that it is for the increasing the production of the 
mine.  It is to increase the production of the mine so that 
they have additional, you know, coal which they would then 
beneficiate. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 170 of 193 
 
 
So they have used the word production in their 
letter.  I have used the word operations.  So.  But my 
understanding is that it is the same aspect of it.  But 
maybe we are not hearing each other because I am not 
understanding it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Seleka wants to pursue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Dr Nteta ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   Yes.  Thank you. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The submission reads: 
“However, Tegeta has requested that Eskom 
considers some form of prepayment.” 
 
That is you writing before Tegeta has put this thing 
– the offer in writing.  You are saying: 
“Tegeta has requested Eskom to consider 
some form of prepayment to enable to it to 
meet the production requirements from the 
export component of the mine.” 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You wrote that in the submission. 
DR NTETA:   So what I...  Yes, what I was saying to you is 
that we have had discussions.  I have had discussions with 
Mr Nath.   
 
So for example, when he first came to me and said 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 171 of 193 
 
to me that we require a prepayment, I did ask him the 
question as to:  Why do you require this prepayment?   
 
And then he gave me the explanation as to:  No, it 
is for the production, et cetera, for the mine. 
 
I also indicated and he said:  No, it is okay.  And 
he continued and I said to him anyway, at the end of the 
conversation, I did say to him:  I was just asking but when 
you are talking about payment terms and the reasons, et 
cetera, that is within the domain of finance. 
 
So he had indicated to me why they needed it.  
10 
You are correct.  I received a written offer on the Monday 
but I had spoken to him before because when he first said 
to me that he needed a prepayment.  My reaction was why 
and that is the reason that he came to me. 
 
We had spoken about whether I should have 
received 
the 
offer 
letter 
before, 
before 
doing 
the 
submission and I conceded I should have gotten it before.  
I did not but I did not understand why they wanted it from 
Mr Nath. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but your submission does not say 
20 
anything about beneficiation of the coal that is mined.   
DR NTETA:   Sorry?  My submission does not say? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Your submission to the BTC does not 
say anything about beneficiation of the coal that would be 
supplied.   
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 172 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Okay so I did not put the word beneficiation 
in the submission. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it is not just a ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   I just have to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is not just a word.  That is their 
reason why they want a prepayment.   
DR NTETA:   Okay.  I am trying to get to the submission so 
that we can read it, exactly what it says. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The submission is in Eskom Bundle 18 
on page 239. 
10 
DR NTETA:   2239? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Two...  I beg your pardon.  293. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   293. 
DR NTETA:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  That paragraph which says:   
“But suppliers have indicated their willingness 
to extend the current contract.  However, 
Tegeta has requested that Eskom considers 
some form of prepayment to enable it to meet 
20 
the production requirements from the export 
component of the mine.” 
 
Then it carries on: 
“In view of the fact that it subsidises the direct 
feed to Hendrina power and this will enable it 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 173 of 193 
 
to meet the coal supply demands for the two 
power stations in the short term.” 
 
And the two power stations referred to is Hendrina 
and Kriel?  I am not sure.  You can tell.  Arnot and Kriel 
Power Stations.  I beg your pardon. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.  And you are contrasting that statement 
to? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Their own written offer to you. 
DR 
NTETA: 
 
 
Yes? 
 
The 
top 
of 
production 
and 
beneficiation? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   That ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I wonder whether when they say 
they need the funds for increasing the production of the 
mine.  Well, if they wanted to revive the export section and 
if the domestic section and the export section are on the 
same mine, it may well be that one could talk about 
increasing the production of the mine. 
 
It is just that the export section that they are 
20 
talking about but they may have refrained in their written 
offer from making that clear.  
 
Maybe because it might have weakened their case 
for a prepayment but they have refrain.  But when they 
were speaking to Dr Nteta, they – just before they decided:  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 174 of 193 
 
No, let us just say production of the mine.  Without talking 
about the export section and the internal or domestic 
section. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if one looks at it that way, would one 
not be able to say they just refrained from being clearer 
than they could have been?  They just put a general phrase 
and said:  Well, nobody would say we are lying if we say 
we want to increase the production of the mine.  Of course 
we want to increase the production of the mine because we 
10 
want to revive the export sections. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am just taking that ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that as a step to say, maybe that is - 
to that extent, maybe that is not untrue but once one has 
Dr Nteta’s evidence about what they told her, then one may 
well say:  Well, in effect it was not – it might not have been 
increasing the production of the internal or domestic 
section of the mine.  It was maybe for increasing the 
20 
reviving the production of the export section of the mine. 
 
And then the beneficiation may be applies either 
way but towards the end of that sentence, they say:  We 
need funds for smooth execution of this contract.  And this 
contract was about the domestic section and not the export 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 175 of 193 
 
section. 
 
And I wonder whether that is not where the 
sentence, the statement might be clearly misleading if what 
they told Dr Nteta was true, namely that they actually 
wanted to revive the export operations. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Chair that is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You wanted to say something? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is the problem we have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   As the Legal Team.   Because 
10 
Dr Nteta...  If Chair as you say, maybe they thought 
mentioning it explicitly reopening the export section of the 
mine 
would 
weaken 
their 
offer 
or 
their 
request 
for 
prepayment, then Chair it would not have found its way 
into the submission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because that seems to be a point 
explicitly made in the submission by the Eskom officials, 
that this is what Tegeta intends to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And we are trying to see but is that 
what Tegeta thought. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because the impression created 
Dr Nteta is that you within Eskom were helping Tegeta to 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 176 of 193 
 
come up with a reason that would justify a decision for a 
prepayment.  That is the impression created.  Are you able 
to comment on that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you must indicate that is the – 
you must indicate to her – enable her to comment properly.  
You need to say what it is that gives rise to that 
impression. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you, Chair.  So what – ja, 
what we were going through now, the exercise is that we 
see that there is one reason in your submission that the 
10 
prepayment is sought for the purposes of Tegeta and I will 
paraphrase, reopening its export section of the mine. 
 
That reason is in the submission during the 
drafting process before Tegeta makes you a written offer.  
The 
written 
offer 
comes 
late 
afternoon 
on 
the 
11 t h of April 2016 and the written offer seems to have a 
different reason given for why Tegeta itself wants a 
prepayment. 
 
So my submission – what I was putting to you is 
this.  That if one looks at the actions taken by Eskom’s 
20 
executives, Friday night, over the weekend, drafting that 
four page document without even having a written offer 
from Tegeta, coming up with reasons why Tegeta wants a 
prepayment.   
 
It would seem that you within Eskom in drafting 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 177 of 193 
 
that submission, you were seeking to assist Tegeta to come 
up with reasons that would justify the BTC making a 
prepayment decision.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Not quite clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I want to say something because I 
want us to finish her evidence if this is where her evidence 
was supposed to finish, namely, if you contrast the two, 
namely the reason that she gave in her submission to the 
BTC as to why Tegeta needed the prepayment, you 
10 
contrasted with the reason given by Tegeta in their written 
offer. 
 
The reason that she gave is – was unlikely to 
strengthen the case for justification.  Maybe this one – if 
she had put this one that might have been – one might 
have said well maybe she was trying to not reveal the true 
reason.  That is my thinking. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But let her answer and she might say:  
No, no, no.  Actually, this is the position.  Dr Nteta? 
20 
DR NTETA:   So.  Thank you, Chairperson.  I must say that 
I am feeling a little bit confused.  But what I am going to 
tell you is what happened.  The supplier indicated to me as 
to why and they indicated this to me verbally as to why 
they want the prepayment. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 178 of 193 
 
 
I then took that reason and put it within the 
document and wrote it in the document.  Correctly so, I 
should have waited for them to put in writing and put it 
verbatim what they said in the document.  I did not do that. 
 
I put in the document what I understood their 
reason for the prepayment.  I did not delve into the detail 
of that because I believed that when you discussed 
payment and payment terms it is something that I would 
then expect the people who make the decision as to 
whether or not to make a prepayment, they will then look 
10 
into the justification for that.  So that is what I did.   
 
In understanding the difference between the two 
and which is stronger or not, I do not know but I do know is 
what I put into the document based on what the supplier 
had said and what I understood it to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you plan another witness after her? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is that? 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is Ms Venete Klein. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   The technology was interrupted.  So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   May I make a comment? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 179 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
DR NTETA:   Deputy...  DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
DR NTETA:   I am not coming back.  I refuse to come back.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
DR NTETA:   So I rather you stay and finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
DR NTETA:   This has been a very exhausting experience.  
10 
I have been with the investigators and your evidence 
leaders for very long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   So whilst you deliberate, please remember 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  It is not about you.  It is more 
about the next witness.  [laughs]  I think if her evidence 
was really about the submission, I think we must wrap this, 
but you are the Evidence Leader. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t know if there is something else 
important that you still wanted to – but we have been on 
this submission since she started. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, Chair the entire evidence turns on 
it.  There are certain things in regard to the offer that we 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 180 of 193 
 
might need to touch upon quickly, and ...[intervenes]     
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what will they lead to, what is the 
point they will assist in making? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, well Chairperson, Dr Nteta you 
are listening as well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you can tell me if you would like me 
to wait until you asked those questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No I think, I mean I have consulted 
with Dr Nteta, she knows exactly – Dr Nteta will – there are 
certain things about the prepayments, the discount that 
10 
was given by Tegeta, you will have to tell the Chairperson 
about that, and how that issue was dealt with, because you 
see in the evidence the BTC was told the CFO, Mr Anoj 
Singh will negotiate the discounts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well you will wrap that up in ten 
minutes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No that should take shorter than that.  
Dr Nteta I am sure you can take shorter than that, isn’t it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I think ...[intervenes]  
DR NTETA:   If it means I leave sooner I will. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja she doesn’t give long answers so I 
think just ask her the questions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, just tell the Chairperson Dr Nteta 
I mean Tegeta here offered – made an offer of a 3.5% 
discount, and you know that that offer in your response 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 181 of 193 
 
was taken off, if you go to page 229, so you took off that 
offer and then BTC was told that now Mr Anoj Singh is 
going to negotiate the offer of 3.5 discount, I mean – ja, a 
discount of 3.5.  But the point was Tegeta had in fact 
already made that offer to you, so you get – can you 
please explain to the Chairperson, you understand the 
proposition I am putting to you? 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so with regards to the payments and the 
discount when I asked – when I spoke – when I engaged 
with the supplier as I indicated to you that I was coming to 
10 
them from a sourcing and an acquisition of assets position, 
in terms of looking for coal.   Now when you talk to the 
segregation of duty within Eskom, and in fact there’s 
Tetris, the person who deals with acquiring the assets 
should not be the same person who deals with payment 
and that needs to fall somewhere else.  Within Eskom that 
falls within the finance right, so when I spoke to Mr Nath 
and also when we talk about our offer letters the offer 
letter talks to how much are they offering for coal.  I opted 
because I thought it was the best thing to delink the 
20 
payment to the offer, because my understanding was that 
the BTC was going to deliberate in terms of whether they 
even think that a prepayment is required, is necessary, 
should be done.  If the BTC had come back and said we 
are not willing to do that and then remained maybe at that 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 182 of 193 
 
amount, so I then felt that we need to delink and I also told 
Mr Nath that the payment issue will be discussed with – 
will be negotiated with finance, because I did not want to 
get into that element, so when we got into the BTC they 
deliberated in terms of that and then the BTC decided that, 
one, the prepayment is something that they will consider, 
and two, that they believed that the finance, head of 
finance, the CFO, should negotiate that.   
 
Whether it was going to be 3.5, 5%, 10%, 1% he 
had the tools to be able to ascertain as to what [no audio] 
10 
and that is how it got – my suggestion to the supplier that 
he removes it, because I am talking to only the coal but 
you will note that in the letter, but it was within the domain 
of finance. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, well that response doesn’t 
necessarily answer the proposition, but it has an aspect in 
it of what I am trying to – I am trying you to show the 
Chairperson, because the evidence of the Parliamentary 
Portfolio Committee, and which is what we see here again, 
is that the BTC was told that Mr Singh will negotiate a 
20 
discount, and I think it was expressly stated that it will be 
3.5% to the BTC.  What the BTC was not told is that in fact 
Tegeta had already offered a discount, so there was no 
negotiation to be made, because the offer had already 
been made up front.  That is the one thing, and I wanted 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 183 of 193 
 
you to explain that to the Chairperson, that is one. 
 
Number two is that this payment, the prepayment 
was made on the 13 t h of April 2016 there is no indication 
and in fact Mr Anoj Singh was asked about this other 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee, there is no indication 
that he in fact negotiated any discount and he was asked 
who did you negotiate with and he could not remember. 
 
So those are the aspects I had thought you would 
tell the Chairperson about, because the BTC was not told 
that Tegeta had made an offer, correct? 
10 
DR NTETA:   So the BTC was I beg to differ in terms of 
whether the BTC was told about 3.5%, I do not think so, 
however I am going to provide you with my perspective, the 
figure of 3.5% is something that at the point that we are at 
BTC we would not know whether it is the right number or 
not, so when I then talk about the offer and I am going to 
say it again, I am looking at it as saying that the supplier 
has said to us it is going to be this amount, the figure, the 
number, the figure, whatever it is, and that is what it is, so 
if there is no prepayment, because I would not know 
20 
whether the BTC is going to say yes to a prepayment or no 
to a prepayment, so that is why it is not indicated there. 
 
The BTC deliberated in terms of who must do this 
negotiation.  I am not sure they actually spoke to a 
percentage discount, because I am assuming that the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 184 of 193 
 
finance people will do what they wish to do, so that is to 
answer the first one. 
 
The second one was where you said to me the 
payment was made within three days.  I am not going to go 
into comment in terms of the payment aspect, because I 
will take us back to [distorted] and it was the responsibility 
of the CFO to negotiate an acceptable discount and 
whether he did or he did not I am not going to go into that 
one, but for me I was really focusing on the acquisition of 
the coal.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the written offer of Tegeta placed 
before the BTC on the 11 t h?  
DR NTETA:   It wasn’t, Chair it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, how come? 
DR NTETA:   The written offer came in at about half past 
four, if my memory serves me correctly I was working on 
the submission and I only really engaged that particular 
written offer as it is the next day, so it was not put to the 
BTC at the time. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes thank you Chairperson.   And – ja I 
hear you saying that you don’t want to go to the issue of 
payment but were you not – did you not play any role in 
ensuring that payment is executed, did your role here end 
on that night of 11 April 2016 or did it carry on? 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 185 of 193 
 
DR NTETA:   Yes, so the only role that I played, so yes my 
role ended the night of the BTC submission.  The role that 
I played the next day was Mr Nath sent me a pro-form 
invoice, the evidence will tell what time he did so and – for 
payment and what I did is I forwarded it to the people who 
were delegated in terms of the – sorry – not delegated, I 
forwarded it to Mr Magelani and I think it is Suzanne, and I 
am just recalling from the evidence.   What I do know for 
sure and I recall is that I contacted Mr – the Head of 
Finance and asked him whether he was aware of this 
10 
prepayment, he said no and I suggested that he speak to 
the CFO and then I also forwarded him the document and 
that is where my – it ended, because I go back again and 
talk about a segregation of duty. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chairperson the email that forwarded 
the pro forma invoices on Eskom Bundle 14 page 236, page 
236 that is again an email from Ravindra Nath Tuesday 12 
April 2016, the next day after the night of the decision to 
make a prepayment.  It is at 14:07, it is addressed to you 
Dr Nteta, Eskom pro forma invoice, Eskom pro forma 
20 
invoice is the attachment: 
“Hello Madam 
Please 
find 
attached 
pro 
forma 
invoice 
for 
prepayment.” 
And the invoice is on page 237, exactly 659 – just about 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 186 of 193 
 
R659million. 
 
Right Dr Nteta you had said you don’t get involved 
in the payment but here you are calling the finance person 
to find out whether they have received this invoice. 
DR NTETA:   Correct. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Are you going to tell the Chairperson 
that was also not unusual? 
DR NTETA:   No, so when I received the invoice from the 
supplier I thought it was unusual, unusual for a few 
reasons, one, the BTC had deliberated the night before, so 
10 
I was – it was unusual because now it is two o’clock and 
now they are sending a pro forma invoice, so it is unusual.  
Secondly I don’t received invoices, so once we negotiated 
the coal supply agreements the invoices etcetera are sent 
to finance etcetera so I don’t receive it, so that was also 
unusual to me.  
 
So in calling the finance person and alerting him 
that I have received this invoice, one, have they negotiated 
this prepayment you know what is the situation and he then 
said to me he knew nothing on it.  So yes it is unusual for 
20 
me to receive an invoice, and I don’t get involved in the 
payment aspects, and I should not get involved in the 
payment aspects. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, page 238, Eskom Bundle 
...[intervenes]  
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 187 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That has taken more than ten minutes 
Mr Seleka, I thought you were going to wrap up within ten 
minutes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Well let me wrap with this.   Page 238 
are those two emails, one to you with the pro forma invoice 
and you forward that email to Mr Edwin Magelani and Ms 
Suzanne Daniels at 14:26.    You received it at 14:07, you 
forward it to them at 14:26.  Do you see that? 
DR NTETA:   Yes I do. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Herewith pro forma invoice, please 
10 
note it includes VAT.  So why didn’t you leave it to them to 
process payment, phone whoever they  need to phone, why 
did you personally phone the finance person?  
DR NTETA:   Why did I phone the finance person? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, after you sent the email to Mr 
Edwin Magelani and Ms Suzanne Daniels, why didn’t you 
leave the matter there?   Why did you have to phone the 
finance person? 
DR NTETA:   So the question is once I forwarded that 
invoice, pro forma invoice to Mr Magelani and Ms Daniels 
20 
why did I take up the phone and phone the finance 
department? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
DR NTETA:   Is that the question? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, why didn’t you leave the matter 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 188 of 193 
 
up to them, Mr ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but Mr Seleka what point will this 
really make, if you send something, a document to 
somebody you can pick up the phone and say did you 
receive it. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair she is not sending it to the 
finance person here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is that? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She is sending it to Mr Edwin Magelani 
and Ms Suzanne Daniels. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and what is she sending? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The pro forma invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but where will that take us if it is 
Mr Magelani or somebody in the finance department, what 
will it – what point will it be? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   When – or let me say this Chair, if I 
send 
– 
I 
receive 
this 
email 
and 
I 
send 
it 
to 
the 
Chairperson, who is not in finance, but the Chairperson is 
my superior, I then should stop there, and that is what I am 
asking Dr Nteta, why did you take another step of phoning 
20 
a finance person when my superior could have done 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what point does it advance in 
terms of what we are trying to establish? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is the very impression Chair of the 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 189 of 193 
 
efforts made within Eskom by Eskom’s own official to 
assist in this process.   You take the extraordinary means 
to assist in this process.   So we are trying to correct that 
impression maybe Dr Nteta will explain why she took that 
step. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I mean after we have spent as much 
time as we have spent on this submission, I don’t think that 
I want to spend more time on those minor points, that is a 
minor point.   I really would like us to move on. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, well that comes to the end of it 
10 
Chair because well ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want her – you would like her to 
discuss that one at least.   Okay, Dr Nteta just answer that 
one last question. 
DR NTETA:   So the last question was why did I to quote 
Advocate Seleka, take extraordinary steps, what I want to 
say it is not extraordinary steps, I pick up the phone and 
call the finance business partner because what I had 
received was an invoice, so I don’t think it is an 
extraordinary extra step, I felt it was – I should inform 
20 
them before I sent them the pro forma invoice cold. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not satisfied? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   She has not created the impression, 
that is your evidence Dr Nteta, that is your evidence.  You 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 190 of 193 
 
see Mr Zithembe Khoza is alleging collusion, he is alleging 
you interacting with the Guptas and you are saying to the 
Chairperson although I send this invoice to my superiors I 
still went to the finance people and told them about this 
invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see if you were referring to her 
making some communication to the Guptas that may have 
been unnecessary then maybe the point would be clearer, 
unless there is something you don’t tell me with regard to 
Mr Magelani, or that I am missing.  Wasn’t Mr Magelani her 
10 
superior? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   He was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was, so ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   These are the principals or senior 
staff. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so she may have wanted to update 
him to say we have received an invoice, isn’t it? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Let me make it clear to the 
Chairperson.   Dr Nteta tell the Chairperson who is the 
finance person you phoned? 
20 
DR NTETA:   Mr Snell Naga, he is the  head of finance is 
primary 
energy 
division, 
he 
is 
the 
gentleman 
who 
processes payments for coal transactions. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, so it is not Mr Magelani who is 
phoned. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 191 of 193 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR NTETA:   There is no need to phone Mr Magelani 
because he was involved in the transaction, Snell was not.  
That is why I phoned him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is fine Chair, ja because the 
payment gets to be made ...[indistinct] and Chair I don’t 
know whether you would recall the evidence of Mr Gert 
Opperman who gets this invoice much later for him to 
authorise the payment and he says at that time, I think it is 
10 
the 19 t h of April, he thought that the payment had not been 
made, and that he was authorising a payment that would 
be made as opposed to one already made. 
 
And I think Dr Nteta also had some interaction there 
with Mr Opperman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, but you said you have 
made your last question. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, that is in her affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you Dr Nteta for availing 
yourself to assist the Commission, you are now excused. 
20 
DR NTETA:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take an adjournment, let’s take a 
short adjournment. 
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 192 of 193 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Seleka and counsel for Ms Klein I 
indicated to Mr Seleka that I have some commitment that 
would need us to take a break maybe for an hour and then 
I would be back to start with Ms Klein’s evidence and I 
apologise that we were going to have that break, but I 
understand that your preference would be that if we are not 
going to finish this evening with her evidence you would 
prefer that we move her to a date when she could start and 
finish her evidence, and Mr Seleka says in terms of the 
10 
line-up of witnesses tomorrow and looking at the time that 
they will take he thinks that we could hear Ms Klein’s 
evidence tomorrow and finish and in the light of that I am 
inclined to say let’s go alone with that.  
 
I understand that there is a request also for her to 
give her evidence via video link because of some situation 
and I am able to allow that as well. 
 
So I just want both of you to confirm whether my 
understanding is correct and that it is fine if we do it this 
way? 
20 
ADV 
SELEKA 
SC: 
 
 
Yes 
Chairperson 
that 
is 
the 
communication during the adjournments that took place 
between my learned friend and I, Mr Mahan representing 
Ms Venete Klein, I confirm what the Chairperson has said, 
Mr Mahan can do likewise. 
09 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 340 
 
Page 193 of 193 
 
ADV MAHAN:   Thank you Chairperson I do confirm and 
may we also express our thanks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you very much.  Okay then 
we will adjourn for the day and then tomorrow Ms Klein will 
appear via video link and we will then have her evidence. 
ADV MAHAN:   Thank you Chairperson I will liaise with my 
learned friend as to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in terms of what time it is likely to 
be.   Okay thank you, we then adjourn for the day. 
 
We adjourn. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 10 FEBRUARY 2021 
