 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
20 APRIL 2021 
 
 
DAY 378 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 362 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
20 APRIL 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 3 of 362 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 20 APRIL 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Soni, good morning 
everybody.  
ADV SONI SC:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good.  Good morning Mr Montana.  .You 
want to make sure that I do not hear you that is why you do 
not put on your mic. 
MR MONTANA:  Good morning Chair thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright okay.  Okay thank you for coming 
back okay let us continue but maybe before we continue I 
10 
just want to tell you Mr Montana I asked the legal team to 
look at all the concerns that you have raised with the 
commission and bring them to my attention so that we can 
look at them – each one on its merits.  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh I think we must just do the oath 
again. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I thought I was still under oath 
because I refused to do media interviews and said I am not 
I am under oath.  I could not even speak to my family I 
20 
said I am still under oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you were but just in case.  Alright. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MONTANA:  Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do have any objection to taking the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 4 of 362 
 
prescribed oath? 
MR MONTANA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR MONTANA:  (Not audible). 
CHAIRPERSON:  We cannot hear you I am sure – ja okay.  
Go back and start afresh. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your name – please state your  
full names for the record. 
MR MONTANA:  Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MONTANA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR MONTANA:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may proceed Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Chairperson I 
am obliged to place on record that we have received a 
letter from Mr Tiro Holele about certain allegations Mr 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 5 of 362 
 
Montana made about him.  He wants to file an affidavit.  I 
am just bringing that to your attention.  He complains that 
he was not given notice that those allegations were going 
to be made . 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  But obviously tell him to file his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no, no. 
ADV SONI SC:  As soon as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine you will – you will attend to 
it. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana can I just indicate to you the 
road map for today and you might remember on Friday I 
indicated to you that there were four sets of affidavits that 
you would need to respond to.  We finished with Mr 
Molefe’s – well for most of that – today I want to start with 
the affidavit of Mr Dingiwayo then I will go to the affidavit 
of Ms Ngoye and then deal with the report of Mr Ormon [?]. 
 
Now the affidavit of Mr Dingiswayo is in Bundle F 
20 
and it is Exhibit SS8 and it is F and starts at page 96.  
Have you got that in front of you Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed – indeed Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  As previously I do not go over all the 
allegations it is just the allegations that concern you and 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 6 of 362 
 
you know the process I follow which is asking you what you 
had admit you deny and what the basis of the denial is. 
 
Can I ask you to turn to page 97 paragraph 4.  I 
think it is the next page.  It is the black 97 number Mr 
Montana.  You will see on the left hand side page numbers. 
MR MONTANA:  Is that the one with the picture there? 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no, no.  It starts with affidavit Mr 
Dingiswayo.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It is under Divider 6. 
MR MONTANA:  I have got it Chair thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  You can turn to page 97 he says at 
paragraph 4: 
“I should point out that it has long been 
known and – at PRASA that there are 
certain 
persons 
in 
entities 
that 
have 
wielded undue influence over some of the 
most senior persons at PRASA starting with 
its former Group Chief Executive officer Mr 
Lucky Montana.” 
20 
 
What is your reaction to this? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair you will see in my affidavit which of 
course has not been considered I thought I will reject this 
it is not based on facts.  I think that the – Mr Dingiswayo 
statement in fact confirms some of the things that I am 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 7 of 362 
 
saying in my affidavit but I will come to that later. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Then he carries on in the next 
sentence. 
“It is equally well-known that if you cross 
Mr Montana’s path or attempted to ensure 
that things were done lawfully and properly 
insofar as these entities and individuals are 
concerned he ruthlessly abused his powers 
and even arrogated to himself powers that 
he did not deserve.” 
10 
 
Your reaction is the same? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair it is laughable what he is – what he 
is saying there.  Because I want the CEO of – I was the 
CEO of PRASA and I was accountable for its performance 
to the board of PRASA so management had ultimately they 
supported me in fulfilling the mandate of the board.   
 
They were not independent of me.  So if someone 
like Dingiswayo or Martha Ngoye wanted to have a life of 
their own and pursue something that I did not even instruct 
them to do or it was not in line with our strategy I had to 
20 
act Chair.  So of course he does not describe what is the 
issue cross path – so I assume Chair that the – if he say 
cross path he mean if you do wrong things with me I will 
deal with it and I will take it in that spirit yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know whether that might be 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 8 of 362 
 
meaning but I suspect that from his point of view he – he 
means if you resist something that Mr Montana wants you 
to do because you think it is wrong and you insist that 
things should be done properly you are crossing his path 
and I suspect that that is his meaning – the intention – the 
meaning he intends. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I understand that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand it ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Of course people who – who want to 
project themselves as corruption busters. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  That is how they present themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And in my affidavit 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I am go into great lengths to explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  In fact what Mr Dingiswayo all the things 
that he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  That are not – that are not lawful.  And by 
the way Chair Mr Dingiswayo did not report to me.  I have 
never even given him a single instruction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So very interesting that. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 9 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  He can actually describe – even have own 
boss Ms Ngoye never described in those terms so it is very 
interesting that the – we are dealing with hearsay rather 
than fact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I guess also what you are saying 
based on your earlier response is somebody in his position 
could level the accusation when you as the superior at 
work say no this is wrong it should not be done and they 
believe it should be done they might describe that still as 
10 
you would see that from their side they in resisting 
something you believe is lawful that they would say you = 
you are abusing your powers when you act against 
wrongdoing. 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair I think one of the major things 
it is very interesting that it starts by saying certain entities 
in fact I think that in my affidavit I demonstrate that – that 
in fact what he did in the legal department which he did not 
have the authority to abuse certain things but he abused it 
to target certain entities and leave others. 
20 
 
So if he was acting consistently and said this is a 
principle 
– 
it 
is 
a 
policy 
of 
the 
company 
I 
would 
understand. But if he targets certain entities and say no 
this I – because you see Chair at this time it is quite clear 
that when Mr Molefe was there certain members of the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 10 of 362 
 
executive when the relationship between and Mr Molefe 
collapsed certain people then aligning themselves and 
therefore they were used to – to do certain things which 
is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean align themselves with Mr 
Molefe. 
MR MONTANA:  With Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  In that instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I guess others aligned themselves 
10 
with you. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ha. 
MR MONTANA:  So – so you will see that if you go to 
another executive – so this is – there is a context to all of 
this but I do not agree with what he is saying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then in paragraph 9 he says: 
“There is one specific matter in respect of 
which I wish to give details as it illustrates 
20 
quite 
graphically 
the 
manner 
in 
which 
PRASA 
operated 
during 
the 
period 
Mr 
Montana was its Group CEO.” 
 
And that is – that is what he is going to deal with in 
effect as you will see in the rest of the affidavit in 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 11 of 362 
 
paragraph he starts off with a contract between PRASA and 
Prodigy Business Services Proprietary Limited.  So that is 
the context against which he is laying this accusation.  I 
am just presenting to you. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes no, no I – thanks Mr Soni.  Chair I just 
wish to emphasise again I deal with this issue in my own 
affidavit in great length and I want to say that the contract 
that Mr Dingiswayo talks about he was not actually in the 
employ of PRASA when this thing happened and it is very 
interesting when I read all the things you see that this 
10 
actually contrasts so much even with what I had written on 
this particular issues. 
 
The people who were there more specifically Mr 
Holele, Mr Mpefu Rakgoathe, Ms Koko who know the ins 
and outs of this particular matter did not file an affidavit 
and somebody who joins PRASA later just on hearsay and 
Werksmans investigation.  So it is hearsay it is not based 
on direct personal knowledge Chair but I think he had 
chosen to elevate it and let us deal with the facts of the 
matter Chair. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes I – I think you are quite right let us 
deal with the facts as he presents them and then after that 
as you present them.  Can I ask you then to look at 
paragraph 11.3 on page 99.  He says in paragraph 11.3. 
“Prodigy 
is 
a 
Johannesburg 
based 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 12 of 362 
 
registered private company.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am sorry Mr Soni.   
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure you may have said this.  
Prodigy the first entity that he wants to deal with is Prodigy 
Business Services. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Limited. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may have mentioned it but… 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh I am sorry I did mention it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For my record – for the record I just want 
to… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, no that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Show the record reflects that this is the 
first one (inaudible). 
ADV SONI SC:  This is the entity yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  And he says: 
“Prodigy 
is 
a 
Johannesburg 
based 
20 
registered private company.” 
 
Is that correct Mr Montana at 11.3? 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair it had a relationship with 
PRASA I do not where they are based I – I assume that is 
correct ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 13 of 362 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright then he says it entered into a 
number of contracts with PRASA to provide training and 
other related services. 
 
Is that correct? 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
Chair 
I 
can 
confirm 
we 
had 
one 
partnership agreement with Prodigy of course there were 
addendums over a period of time that we had indeed. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Alright and then he – he notes that 
the validity of these contracts is now in dispute. 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair I understand the matters are 
10 
between – are in court and I think Prodigy is the one that 
took PRASA to court and for not honouring his agreement 
and payments in that regard. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now 11.4 he says: 
“That a document that was annexed to 
Prodigy’s payment application reflects that 
Prodigy 
reflects 
that 
Ms 
Nerishni 
Shunmugum was a director in 2006 and 
then in 2011 Mr Roy Moodley was appointed 
as director.” 
20 
 
You aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:  Not at all Chair.  Again in my – in my own 
affidavit Chair I state the fact in response to what he is 
saying to Rule 3.3 that the – when we entered an 
agreement with Prodigy there was not actually any Roy 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 14 of 362 
 
Moodley and I think it was in 2010.  So I think he says in 
his affidavit that Roy Moodley became part of that company 
in 2012. 
ADV SONI SC:  2011. 
MR MONTANA:  I think in page 5 well rather page 100. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He says – he does not say when – he 
says he resigned in 2012 Moodley.  He does not say when 
–  
MR MONTANA:  Ja in 2012 he resigned Chair 1 s t of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh he was appointed as a director five 
10 
years after the company was registered which would be 
2011. 
MR MONTANA:  2011 ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  And resigned in – on 1 March 
2012. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you will find that Mr Montana at MMD1 
page 123.  You do not need to look at it – it is just – I am 
just confirming that there. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright what we – what we can accept now 
20 
and I take the point you make is that Mr… 
MR MONTANA:  Dingiswayo. 
ADV SONI SC:  No that Prodigy when it first entered into 
the contract with PRASA did not have Mr Moodley as a 
director Mr Moodley became a director in 2011 and 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 15 of 362 
 
resigned as a director in 2012.  Are those the facts that 
00:15:18? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I do not know – I do not know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know when he became a 
director and when he resigned. 
MR MONTANA:  Oh you mean the other shareholders in the 
business Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  I would not – I would not know their names 
Chair. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  We can accept what the document says. 
MR MONTANA:  Says indeed Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes okay.  Then at paragraph 11.6 on page 
100 he says: 
“Mr Moodley is alleged to have benefited or 
alleged to be related to other entities that 
benefitted from PRASA contracts that were 
concluded irregularly.” 
 
Now because that is a matter I take it you would 
deny that the contracts were concluded irregularly? 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair it is interesting – it is very 
interesting because if you talk – you look at the company 
that I mentioned firstly Royal Security the bid adjudication 
of PRASA that included Mr Holele, Ms Ngoye recommended 
for the expansion of this particular contract.   So somebody 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 16 of 362 
 
comes and recommend that these contracts be extended 
and then come to the commission and file an affidavit that 
these are irregularly – irregular Chair the – to take it 
further.  Chair in my affidavit are part of my annexures they 
actually show that the – that the strawberry contract was 
signed by the CEO of Intersite at that time and it was Ms 
Ngoye.  So – so it is very strange Chair that someone sits 
and you can see that at that time they did not have a 
problem now it is – things changes at PRASA there is a 
conflict between the Chair and the CEO.  They start to ride 
10 
a whole range of things that – that they were actually part 
– they were central – I do not – I am a CEO I do not sit in 
a bid adjudication or bid evaluation.  These are the people 
who recommend.  So if somebody recommends Strawberry 
or recommends Royal Security or recommends Siyangena 
they were in the bid evaluation.  In fact Chair I need to – to 
move 
beyond 
that 
and 
say 
they 
have 
got 
a 
legal 
responsibility – a legal responsibility when they pick up 
any irregularity and advise whoever is going to approve – if 
it is going to be approved by the CEO within the delegation 
20 
of authority they must say we picked up these things.  We 
think they are material or they are not material for me to 
know so that when I make a decision after being told and 
those have been elevated Chair on all of this – oh 
Swifambo and anything none of these bid evaluation 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 17 of 362 
 
committee members including Mr Holele and Ms Ngoye had 
elevated either to me or to the board why do they come to 
your commission today to say that we think that was 
irregular?  I was not there.  They were there.  They were 
dealing with the matters Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is very important.  I assume 
that the – the homework in terms of your affidavit has 
started. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair we were meant to meet today but 
because we set up the date. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MONTANA:  We postponed . 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  But I think Chair we had committed to 
engage and resolve it as quickly as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay no that is fine because for 
example the last point that you made you – you made you 
know can be very important so it is important to see if 
there is any documentation that you attach and so on in 
support of it. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then in paragraph 11.7 we have – we 
know that there is now a dispute that has been taken to 
court and PRASA is challenging the validity of the contract.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 18 of 362 
 
I understand you say that you cannot be held responsible 
other made that. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no, not – not in respect of this Chair I 
think that the 11.6 is very specific allegation.  In 11.7 it is 
a completely different point but I know the fact that PRASA 
is going to court and what I have seen though affidavits 
that were filed where I think Prodigy was the applicant – I 
was not aware of the review application but PRASA is … 
ADV SONI SC:  Anyway we – we know what courts are.  
Courts make their own decisions based on the information 
10 
for them.  We leave that – we – that is the matter that has 
not yet been determined. 
 
And the turn to paragraph 12 Mr Montana it says: 
“I wish to set out in brief the manner in 
which the agreements.” 
 
I know you say there one agreement in respect of 
Prodigy and there were a number of addenda to it.  Okay 
but he is saying that  
“I want to deal with how those – the 
agreement and the addenda were completed 
20 
or concluded and when I raise questions 
about the validity of one of the agreements 
Mr Montana dismissed me and thereafter 
Ms Ngoye who had questioned the fairness 
of my dismissal.” 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 19 of 362 
 
 
We will come to that in a moment but I am just 
saying that he is giving us a road map of where is going to 
in this affidavit. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes but I – Mr Soni I just want to say that 
that very statement Chair is – on – in 12 it is false number 
1 and number 2 here is someone who is going to tell us 
about the – about how these contracts were concluded yet 
he was not working for PRASA Chair when this thing was 
signed.  So maybe Mr Dingiswayo may want to bring 
somebody who told him this story that – because now we 
10 
are dealing with someone who was not there – who is 
telling us – and if he says this comes from an investigation 
he must state that not as if he was – he was personally 
there because I am going to read out the part of my 
affidavit on this particular issue and you will see that these 
are completely two different worlds that exist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now he also makes the point at paragraph 
13 that there was an investigation conducted by Mr Majola 
and he annexures the outcome of that investigation is 
20 
MMD2.  Can I just leave that out for a moment I want to 
come back to it in a little while.  I want to go… 
MR MONTANA:  Chair but I can say without interrupting Mr 
– I think that I assume the investigation referred to in 13 
was done after – after I had left PRASA? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 20 of 362 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Then he says: 
“In regard to the various developments 
regarding this contract he says on the 10 t h 
of June 2010 Ms Shumnigum sent a letter to 
Mr 
Montana 
proposing 
some 
form 
of 
partnership.”  
And he attaches the letter as MMD3 which appears 
at page 138.  I would like you to just go to page 138 
please. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the letter I know very well actually it 
10 
has got my handwritten notes – if I remember that vividly I 
will not even look at it.  It is my letter – it is a letter that 
came to me and as a 00:23:01 Chair every time I give an 
instruction 
because 
I 
knew 
that 
I 
am 
giving 
lawful 
instructions I always wrote on my thing and it is very 
interesting Chair that you will see as we proceed that 
presented before this commission are – are people have 
been selective where I have written and they do not like it 
– does not come to the commission.  It is not evidence.  So 
these are the type of things but I know the letter Chair it 
20 
came – let me correct one thing in 14.1 and I think I deal 
with it in my affidavit Chair.  The letter was not the 
beginning.  There were interactions between Prodigy and 
PRASA employees which culminated in this letter and then 
I dealt with it in a particular way but I detail – I detail 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 21 of 362 
 
everything in my affidavit. 
ADV SONI SC:  I want to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Soni.  We – we all know that 
Mr Montana he has prepare an affidavit. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the affidavit that is the subject of 
the homework I was talking about a few minutes ago. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I suspect that to help him respond to 
some of the allegations that is the affidavit he keeps on 
10 
looking at to see what he has got in it.  Now it may be that 
it would be convenient that if he responds to an allegation 
in – a certain allegation in 14.1 he should respond to it 
fully rather than saying I deny that on the basis that later 
he will give more information about it.  Because if we do it 
that way then in the transcript you find the whole response 
to a particular allegation in one place. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rather than find a denial and then go 
somewhere else to find substantiation of that denial.  What 
20 
do you think of that? 
ADV SONI SC:  I – I agree entirely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Really the only question will be because 
whether one should do that in relation to – we – what we 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 22 of 362 
 
do not want and I understand fully why Chairperson is bits 
and pieces about the same thing in different parts of the 
transcript. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now we – we either say that Mr Montana 
can deal with it now and then when his affidavit comes it 
will be then simply part of the record he will not have to 
deal with it again or we say Mr Montana we reserve this 
issue and deal with it collectively at the time that Mr 
Montana submits his affidavit.  I am just trying to find the 
10 
most 00:26:24. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I was thinking is that the reason 
why his affidavit is not being used now it is because the 
issue of annexures must still be sorted out otherwise if that 
had been sorted out it would have been available to use.  
But I think there is nothing – there is no problem if he tells 
me what is in the affidavit without the affidavit being – 
because that is his response. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is what I was thinking so that 
when the affidavit is filed one – one reads – one sees in it 
what he has already told – told us. 
ADV SONI SC:  Absolutely. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 23 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  So – so let us try that Mr 
Montana so that your response to a particular allegation 
are not scattered all over. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I was trying to hide my affidavit and 
say that it is not – they have been admitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were caught out. 
MR MONTANA:  So I was 00:27:35 and – but I got caught. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You got caught.  No, no that is fine but 
10 
there is no problem if you tell me what is in the affidavit as 
your oral evidence.  What is not being done is give – give 
the affidavit to me before it is – it is completed in terms of 
annexures.  But in terms of telling me what is – what it is 
in it it is fine.  But I think – I think you should not tell me 
paragraphs for example to say in paragraph so and so in 
my affidavit I think do not – do not tell me the paragraph 
just tell me the story – your – what you have to say about a 
particular allegation. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair I think that I 
20 
address it in a – and this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  This Chair are part of what I considered 
with regard to Rule 3.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 24 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  And Regulation 10.6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So I have included all of those as well into 
– into my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  Check the – I am just addressing four 
basic things here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MR MONTANA:  The first one of course I deal with the 
issue that the – Mr Soni raised the description that Mr 
10 
Dingiswayo raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And I said the PRASA he describes it did 
not exist I do not even know it Chair.  But also indicating 
that I expected him to be a professional not to serve 
certain interests and in this particular case that is what he 
did and – and his target on my Mr Moodley actually Chair I 
deal with it at great length in terms of that.  Chair I -  I 
then go to – to indicate again that Mr Dingiswayo was not 
at PRASA when this conversation started – when the 
20 
contracts were put in place. Thirdly Chair I then go into 
detail to say how the process providing the genesis of this 
particular project that in fact it goes back to 2009 when – 
when Prodigy interacted with PRASA officials including Mr 
Mpefu Ramudwa [?] and Chair what it proposed in essence 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 25 of 362 
 
is that it proposed a partnership because it was awarded 
what you call learnerships from the services SETA and he 
says look we have got learnerships for about 300 people to 
PRASA so that they – then we explore that in terms of the 
– on the people who service – on the services’ side or 
customer services’ side of the business.  We train them.  
And this was a very unique proposal that they presented to 
us, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And we are happy.  We accepted and that 
10 
is why the letter that Mr Soni referred.  So it was then 
elevated to me.  Then I said, no, that actually is a great 
thing.  Let us ...[indistinct] with them, Chair.  And the 
partnership 
was 
developed, 
prepared 
by 
our 
legal 
department, 
Chair, 
at 
that 
time 
because 
it 
was 
Mr Lindikaya Zide. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Dingiswayo was not here, at PRASA, 
Chair.  And it was developed fine.  And the training took 
place, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was Ms Ngoye there at that time? 
MR MONTANA:   Ms Ngoye was not at PRASA – was not – 
it was in 2009/2010, she was not there, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   She was not even there at all.  She was 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 26 of 362 
 
not - because I think she joined, if I remember and recall, 
Chair, she joined PRASA only in 2011 and she joined, not 
as a CEO or as an Executive, she actually was a – she left 
from Transnet in the Legal Department.  She joined our 
property arm and being the Head of the Office of the CEO 
at Intersite.  And Chair when the CEO left – because she 
was doing a lot of the work, she showed interest in the 
work and I am the one, Chair, who recommended that she 
gets appointed as the Executive, Chair.   
 
So the people who say today I am a dictator, you 
10 
cannot stand on my part, other people – all of them, Chair, 
were appointed by me.  Even Mr Dingiswayo.  When her 
first boss who joined us from, I think, Standard Bank 
recommended that she is keen.  He held interviews but he 
think he has got his man.  I said:  Well, it is your team.  
You do – as long as you bring professionals that are there. 
 
Mr Holele, Chair, you know, when we appointed, 
I know Mr Holele for a very long time.  When we appointed 
him as an Executive, I had a big fight with the HR and the 
Remuneration Committee of the Board.  They said he is 
20 
still 
a 
young 
man, 
he 
is 
not 
yet 
experienced 
and 
everything.  I said this man has got a sharp mind.  I think 
that he is one for the future.  Let us invest in him.   
 
The board rejected my arguments.  They actually 
said:  No, get an experienced old white man to guide you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 27 of 362 
 
and assist you instead of taking of this young man.  The 
board then instructed the HR Committee of the board and 
me to say:  You guys, go and meet and try to find 
consensus on the issue.  We went, we met ...[indistinct], 
Chair.  And the HR Committee was quizzing me, Chair, to 
say motivate, tell us.  And I said:  Look, you want me to 
bring an old white man to be my advisor.  For me, tomorrow 
when I leave PRASA, I need to ensure that we built a cadre 
of young competent black professionals who can continue, 
running the same DG.  And ultimately the board agreed. 
10 
 
Now when I disciplined Mr Holele, Chair, and 
that is why he is taking strong(?).  He worked with me.  
When the unions accused me of corruption, the person who 
penned an article in the Mail & Guardian defending me was 
Mr Holele but later I had to discipline him and he changed 
and I became the monster that is described in these pages, 
Chair. 
 
So I think that – as long as we are guided by the 
facts, you have got the right to form, to have an opinion, 
Chair, and I have got my own views about these people but 
20 
all the people, Chair, who stabbed me at the back are 
people that I tried to build.  I appointed – when Ms Ngoye 
is to leave Intersite, Chair, and I think in her replying 
affidavit she described and talked about bonuses. 
 
The Board of Intersite of which I was a Chair, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 28 of 362 
 
had said:  Look, we are not getting the results from 
...[indistinct]  Let us follow proper process and make sure 
that we replace her.  I had a one on one meeting with her.  
I said:  Look, my dear sister, I am not saying you are not a 
CEO but it is quite clear you are not ready.   
 
Now the board want us to take this and I 
objected.  I recommended that instead of you, you can 
prepare 
yourself. 
 
We 
are 
consolidating 
our 
– 
and 
restructuring our legal and compliance function.  And I 
think I have requested that – I have advised that you 
10 
assume that position as a Group Executive.  If you become 
CEO 
of 
PRASA 
tomorrow 
any 
of 
his 
divisions 
or 
subsidiaries that is fine.   
 
Chair, she cried and she cried.  She cried and 
when I left and I went on leave, to show my confidence as 
part – because we using when I leave we would then select 
an executive to act.  So this one man show – that PRASA 
is a one man show like ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you did not finish the point you 
wanted to make.  I think you have started making it.  I 
20 
think you have wanted to say when you went on leave you 
recommended that she be ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   She ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...a Group CEO. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair.  After coming(?) from 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 29 of 362 
 
Intersite and she was in the group position that she was, 
Group Legal Risk and Compliance, I recommended that she 
act because every time I will try – I will then pick up any of 
the executives.  Of course, that I do in consultation with 
the chair of the board and depending on the duration.  I 
will say so and so will act in a position.   
 
Martha acted in a position, Chair.  But I did not 
realise how ...[indistinct] she was.  That we – she is no 
longer CEO of Intersite.  So when I allowed her to act into 
that position in December 2014 that is when she went on 
10 
the defensive with Mr Molefe to investigate me, to try and 
find all sorts of things that were there.  But again, all of 
them were – all of them, Chair, I wanted them here at the 
Commission.  I prove each of these to be false and 
founded, Chair.   
 
I have got my own witnesses as a human being 
but the ones that I am accused of in these pages, Chair, 
are totally false, Chair.  All of us as human beings, we 
have got our own faults.  I have got mine but the ones that 
I mention here, Chair, are part of an agenda to try and 
20 
discredit me and at the heart of it, were people who met 
with Mr Molefe behind my back to try and build a case and 
I demonstrate that in the course of the conversation, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay alright.   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, finally, because you interrupted.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 30 of 362 
 
The final point, Chair.  You know, value for money.  I was 
part with ministers on the ...[indistinct] with the trade 
unions.  When the first group of people were trained were 
being recognised because this recognise is big.  For 
employees who do not have matric, who do not have 
qualification, this was a major thing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the training? 
MR MONTANA:   The training ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that was done by Prodigy.  And because 
10 
it was accredited widely, Chair.  Employees and particular 
our customer services, the staff, they loved it, Chair.  
Lastly on this issue, Chair.  We even received an 
international award.  I just – I wanted to bring it and leave 
it here Chair.  Which our Customer Services Executive in 
our range division went to receive overseas which was for 
innovation, for excellence, Chair.   
 
Today, as I come here, Chair, employees, the 
trade union call me to say:  You know, our people have 
been trained.  They have not been given their own 
20 
certificates.  They want those certificates because for them 
if they were to be retrenched today, they will be able to go 
to any customer services business and use this.  So, yes, 
you may be pick up irregularities, Chair.  I do not have a 
problem when somebody picks up an irregularity and say 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 31 of 362 
 
maybe here we did not...   
 
By the way, Mr Dingiswayo in his affidavit or 
rather in a letter that you see attached to my affidavit.  He 
says some of the executives who were dealing with this 
issue of Prodigy actually mislead Mr Montana.  He says 
that in black and white, okay?  Yet he forgot his own letter, 
Chair.  And now this thing is about Montana.  It is no 
longer about those officials.   
 
So he was in there, he writes something, he 
changes because at the heart of is it that no, we must 
10 
show...  You know, Chair, after I have dealt with the 
Gupta’s ...[indistinct] PRASA.  Now people say, no, there 
must be another Gupta and this Gupta – that is why you 
see Mr Molefe, Mr Dingiswayo, Ms Ngoye the write about 
Roy Moodley because he is supposed to be a Gupta 
PRASA that lie(?).  He dealt with these Gupta’s.  There is 
another Gupta.   
 
And you must also understand the writing and 
the tone of..  But Chair I am an independent person and I 
think – I know that I am maybe taking a bit long but Chair I 
20 
fought with a lot of people, ministers and if there is 
something I believe is wrong I say it is wrong.  But if I 
believe that is a strategy(?) - always happened in my 
Executive Committee meetings.  We are going to do 1, 2, 3 
after I have debated.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 32 of 362 
 
 
And I have never been afraid Chair because I 
have never made unlawful decisions and all of those 
things.  But there is an attempt to take whatever may have 
been a mistake or a shortcoming on irregularity to elevate 
it so that it becomes criminality so that those of us who do 
not follow a particular narrative are persuade and chased 
Chair.   
 
And unfortunately not with the business of 
PRASA because I happen to have the facts and I am here 
to assist the Commission to understand both sides of that 
10 
narrative Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am sorry, Mr Montana.  I – you saw 
me smile and the reason I smile is somebody said to me 
that the Gupta’s were from India.  Roy Moodley was the 
Gupta from KZN. 
MR MONTANA:   From KZ...  Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I – that ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct]  
20 
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is what somebody said to me.  
That is the reason I smiled. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But ...[intervenes]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 33 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, I think that is a good point, Chair.  
But I was changed(?).  You see, the problem at PRASA, 
Chair is because people thought at the beginning, they 
thought the Gupta’s are so much at PRASA.  When they 
realised the Gupta’s are not at PRASA because we said no, 
then they had to find something else.  They did not stop 
and said the Gupta’s are not there.  They actually thought 
the Gupta’s were involved with President Zuma in the 
PRASA Rolling Stock Programme.   
 
Chair, the reality is that there was no President 
10 
Zuma, there were no Gupta’s at PRASA.  I stood my ground 
and all the records, Chair, even when we discussed in 
Parliament in the Parliamentary Inquiry into Governance at 
Eskom, I dealt with the Gupta’s story.  Minister Dan 
Martins came to confirm all of that.  So there were no 
Gupta’s but people thought we are captured by the 
Gupta’s.   
 
They are not my friends, Chair.  I mean, even 
the – I have never – you know, people tell me they went to 
the Gupta’s compound, eat, worked there, carry and other 
20 
things you were told Chair.  Chair, where I used to stay, I 
am in the – I was in the same street as Duduzane Zuma 
and the Gupta’s were in the corner.  They have never been 
to my house.  I have never been to their house and I have 
never asked for any favours from them Chair in my entire 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 34 of 362 
 
life.   
 
And this has to do with my own upbringing Chair.  
My parents will frown upon me, you know, going after 
people to ask for favours instead of doing things in a 
proper way.  So I am not saying, the Commission can point 
and say – Chair, you may ask me and say:  Mr Montana, 
with hindsight, you think that decision was a mistake?  
Chair, I will be here.   
 
I will tell you to say:  Chair, after I have thought 
about it and seen the full picture, I think it was an error of 
10 
judgment on my side.  I am here to take accountability, not 
to pass accountability.  But at the same time, the lies that 
have been printed in the country that do not have basis 
whatsoever.  Chair, I think I am going to challenge them 
and take them head-on Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no I am happy, Mr Montana, that 
you are using the Commission to deal with whatever 
allegations that it made against you and to place before 
the Commission all the facts that as you know them as you 
believe the Commission should know because that is what 
20 
we want.  That is what we want.  We are not here to want 
one side because we want a particular outcome.   
 
I mean, if – you know, sometimes I do not 
understand some things that one in the newspapers about 
me and about the Commission.  If I want to make a finding 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 35 of 362 
 
against you, Mr Montana, how – what a bad person you 
are, the best way for me to do that is not to have you here 
giving me contrary evidence, giving me examples of what a 
good person you are.   
 
The best thing is for me to grab the first 
opportunity when you indicate you do not want to come.  
And you say okay, okay.  You do not come.  Because if I do 
it that way, the only evidence I will have is the evidence 
against you.  When I want you to come and tell your story, 
it does not make sense to say I want to find against you.  
10 
What if you give me compelling evidence that the people 
are saying all kinds of things against you, are lying about 
you. 
MR MONTANA:   But Chair, on a lighter note, I have asked 
and urge that you do make a finding that Mr Montana is 
such a good fellow.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   I think such a finding in the final report, 
Chair, would help the country to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Well, all I can tell you, 
20 
Mr Montana, is that whenever findings I will make about 
anybody – I am not going to be dictated by whatever the 
public says about whatever happens outside the hearing.  
It is going to be based – those findings will be based on 
the evidence that I have heard, you know.  And that – and I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 36 of 362 
 
will be looking at all evidence that has been placed before 
me.   
 
So you are doing the right thing by coming to the 
Commission, putting your side of the story so that, one, the 
public knows your side of the story.  Two, the Commission 
has your evidence.  Whatever the Commission might find in 
the end, you must be able to say but they did have my 
evidence. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  So, 
Mr Montana, 
coming 
back 
to 
14.1. 
 
We 
know 
that 
Ms Shunmugam sent you the letter on the 10 t h of June and 
you wrote a note on the letter.  I just want to read, if you 
do not mind, for the record what is contained in part of the 
letter and in part of your response. 
MR MONTANA:   We are in MM ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We are at page 138, Mr Montana.  
The black 138.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I did not hear the page, 
20 
Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   138. 
CHAIRPERSON:   138. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair.  So Ms Shunmugam says 
and the letter is addressed to PRASA, for your attention 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 37 of 362 
 
and it says in respect of piloting of Centre of Excellence 
Model and Learnership Implementation.  It says: 
“Further to discussions held from March 2010 
with respect to the Centre of Excellence 
Model, Prodigy hereby confirms that it is able 
to provide PRASA with 300 funded learnership 
that will fast track the pilot of the Centre of 
Excellence Model...” 
 
That is what that ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  And he(sic) saying in the 
second paragraph: 
“Prodigy has been awarded bursary funding for 
300 learnership from the Services Seta via the 
discretionary ground process...” 
 
And then in the last – oh, sorry, the third 
sentence he(sic) says: 
“The 300 learnerships will be learnerships that 
will reside with Services Seta and for which 
Prodigy has accreditation, a list of applicable 
20 
qualifications accompanies this letter...” 
 
Then she says: 
“The value to PRASA... [This is in the last 
paragraph] ... of the 300 funded learnerships 
is of the order of R 28 800 000,00 in training 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 38 of 362 
 
grounds and tax allowances. 
PRASA 
will 
be 
able 
to 
claim 
the 
full 
R 60 000,00 and tax allowance per learner 
totalling R 18 million for the 300 learners...” 
 
So that is how she is presenting this to you and 
then you inscribed on that – and as I said we – if you want 
to read then you can but I just wanted the gist of that.  And 
you inscribed on that to Mr Holele and Mr Enkefu(?)    
“The proposal from Prodigy is accepted.   
We should enter in a partnership with Prodigy 
10 
Business Proprietary Limited. 
We need a former MOU to this effect. 
Prepare – kindly prepare ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Oh, the letter from my signature.  
Acknowledging receipt and confirming our acceptance of 
the proposal from Prodigy.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  And you signed that on the 
10 t h of June. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The same day that ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [Indistinct]  
[Speakers intervening each other – unclear] 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us confirm that is 10 June 2010? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 39 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   2010. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   I confirm, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that this is the letter and those were 
the notes written by me, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Can I just ask you, Mr Montana, to 
explain this proposal to me.  I am not sure that I asked any 
10 
of the witnesses that gave evidence previously.  Is the 
position 
that 
Prodigy 
approached 
the 
Services 
Seta 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and was granted money? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you are not granted actual money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are told we are prepared to spend 
so much but we give the money but you will provide 
20 
invoices or whatever. 
MR MONTANA:   Exactly, exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So granted money in that sense. 
MR MONTANA:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not get the cash but the effect of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 40 of 362 
 
the decision of the Seta is.  You can go and train people in 
terms of learnerships to the value of this amount. 
MR MONTANA:   That amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you will be training them for them to 
get the following kind of training or qualification and you 
will be paid by the Seta. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the – what would happen is that 
then once the training has happened ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...then you are able to claim that money 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...from that particular ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which they would have put aside for 
you. 
MR MONTANA:   Which they have put aside.  So they will 
come and say we have entered into, let us say, a 
partnership. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Whether with the SAPS or with PRASA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   We are doing this training.  Once you are 
satisfied and all of those things – and PRASA, even if you 
to pay, Chair, is able to recover that money from that 
claiming processes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 41 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, okay.  So – but in terms of 
this proposal, PRASA would not pay for the training.   
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, it was still paying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because remember when you are – you 
enter into a partnership. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   You may – because you remember when 
10 
we say we used the 300 to pilot that – what do you call it - 
Centre of Excellence and the Centre of Excellence was 
here.  We built it there, just behind Park Station here.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   So then it provides training beyond that.  
So there would be costs that PRASA would carry as well in 
the process and if we increase and if you look at the 
addendum, for example, the addendums will say we think 
this is benefiting the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Then let us add additional numbers.  Then 
those – it will not come from the Seta.  It will then come 
directly from us, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   So we will incur costs as well as PRASA. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 42 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the money the Seta would have put 
aside in this case will be for the actual training? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Now as far as the people who would 
be trained are concerned, would PRASA – would the cost 
that PRASA would incur relate to the actual training or to 
something 
incidental, 
like, 
paying 
for 
the 
venue 
or 
something like that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no.  Even both, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   If you look at it, for example - what 
happened, there was a big fight on this issue.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   After I have sighed, there was an 
agreement and then the initial 300 flew – I think that they 
flowed quite nicely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   When the addendum was signed for the 
next group and I think the numbers would then increase in 
that respect, there was quite a lot of disagreement 
20 
between PRASA managers and Prodigy in respect of that 
particular contract.   
 
In the first place, Chair, what happened is that 
Prodigy then paid – carried a lot of the costs because they 
said:  Well, Seta had given it to you.  You carry the cost 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 43 of 362 
 
and you take back from them.   
 
I do not know about the exact amount, as it 
were, Chair, right now but they then carried the cost but 
the later costs by additional numbers were paid for by 
PRASA and valued the addendums.  I think there were two 
addendums that were signed by – I think one by two of our 
general managers, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  So the terms and conditions under 
which Seta would set aside X amount for Prodigy to do this 
training, would it be on the basis that if the Seta says a 
10 
hundred rand per learner, for example, they are free if they 
agree with PRASA whatever – to charge more per learner 
and then PRASA tops up or they can only charge what the 
Seta – what they had agreed with the Seta?   
 
I am just trying to see how come PRASA would 
still pay for the training.  I can understand if it is other 
expenses.  How come PRASA would still pay for actual 
training of the Seta has given this – is going to pay them 
for the training, Prodigy. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think we decided to use the 
20 
programme to train our entire customer services’ teams. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you – so you ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Throughout the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To widen the scope? 
MR MONTANA:   To widen the scope. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 44 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because he said:  Look, I – why in an 
organisation of 16 people, you are... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The majority are working at stations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Why do you deal with only 300 people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And this had been well received by 
employees who were trained who received the certificate. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So we think that it is something we should 
go on with the programme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So that was not part of the original letter 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that was presented to us, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So that, PRASA would carry for the 
20 
training, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So which, I guess, means that 
insofar as the first 300 are concerned ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   PRASA would not have paid anything in 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 45 of 362 
 
regard to the actual training. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair.  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But insofar as you widened the scope 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...then you will pay because that is not 
covered by the Seta. 
MR MONTANA:   It is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Now I understand.  Okay.  
Mr Soni. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Now, I 
just want to ask.  If you look at these figures on page 138, 
the amount per learner would be R 6000,00.  Would that be 
correct, Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:   You are on page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 138.  We are still at the Prodigy 
letter. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because it is R 18 million for 300 
hundred learners that would be R 6 000,00 per learner.   
20 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, I think – it is correct, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  And 300 funded learnership 
based on an amount to say 300 learners. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, Chair. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 46 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in this case, was it a situation 
where PRASA paid Prodigy and then claimed from Seta 
because that is what the letter seems to say or was it that 
Prodigy claimed from Seta?  I am just trying to – because 
that is what the letter seems to be say.  Do you know or do 
you not? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair but what I know is that PRASA 
itself would claim from – because it is ...[indistinct] you 
would recall.  And I think in terms of our target at that time 
10 
for the number of the people we train, I think it should be 
per annum 2% of the workforce for all the training that are 
subjected to, whether from the transport Seta or from the 
any other Seta who had done the training.   
 
We had the right, Chair, to do that and even from 
a taxpayer perspective, Chair, we could do that.  Of 
course, PRASA was not a tax paying entity.  It is still not 
as far as I know.  But two of its subsidiaries, Top Pax(?) 
and Intersite they can put that on – they can claim that 
from the tax point of view.   
20 
 
The initial cost, Chair, when we were waiting and 
there was a still a lot of bickering – I know that Prodigy did 
want to claim from us but it had carried certain costs at the 
beginning but we said but those you can claim directly from 
the Seta but that was the briefing that I would get from the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 47 of 362 
 
team, Chair, as the project.  It was doing – implemented 
over a period of time.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Or PRASA, obviously, the advantage 
was that it was getting still training for its employees.  For 
Prodigy it was the fact that it was getting work through the 
tune of R 18 million.   
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think if you look it for Prodigy, it 
offered that to us.  I think that one of the things – you will 
see in the Dingiswayo affidavit was that this thing was 
supposed to go out on tender.  But a partnership means 
10 
somebody is bringing something to the table and you agree 
on the value of thereof.  And if we agree to pilot the Centre 
of Excellence through using that learnership programme, 
Chair, it is quite that Prodigy will get the extra work as a 
result beyond the - that is the – so it goes – that is a 
business decision that you have to make, as it were, and I 
supported it on that basis. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the time …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know whether – I am sorry, Mr 
Soni.  Or let me first ask this question.  I take it that in 
20 
terms of how the SETAs operate, an employer such as 
PRASA is entitled to approach the relevant SETA and say I 
would like to have my stuff changed, can you make money 
available and then they can set aside some money with or 
without conditions.  Do you know whether that is true, that 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 48 of 362 
 
is correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, what happens is that the – there 
may be programmes for example that the SETA may say – 
may initiate or PRASA may initiate in the fund but most of 
the training, Chair, we must budget for it.  We budget for 
training as PRASA, we spend the money and then there is 
a time, there is a process where we then apply to get back 
part of the money we spent.  I think there is a formula they 
use. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   So you train people and then they give 
you the money based on that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, so normally as an employer 
you just go ahead and train people. 
MR MONTANA:   We train people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then afterwards go to the SETA and 
say this is the training that I provided to my staff, here is 
proof, these are the expenses I have incurred to carry out 
that training. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then in that case – well, I guess 
when you say there is formula they apply what – probably 
that means is that you do not get everything back in terms 
of your course. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, that is why even in the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 49 of 362 
 
letter there that you are able to get part of that allowance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And it depends also on the nature of the 
training, I mean, you get accredited programme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But let us say a transport SETA is 
approved then they give you the full amount for that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR 
MONTANA:  
 And 
that is 
why 
it is 
aimed 
at 
incentivising both public and private companies to invest in 
10 
skills in the country, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay.  Thank you.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Then he 
says: 
“A partnership agreement between Prodigy and 
PRASA was signed on the 11 October 2010.” 
And he annexures that as MMD4.  You confirm that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, sorry, Mr Chair, you left me behind, I 
still busy with the letter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   You left me behind, Chair, I do not know 
where you are going. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say – because I think he has gone 
back to the affidavit. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 50 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry, sorry. 
MR MONTANA:   Back at page 101? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We are back at page 101, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So if I can just go back so that we 
are all on the same lines, as it were, we started off on the 
10 June.  The letter was sent then you made the inscription 
on the letter.  Those are the first three sentences of 
paragraph 14.1, Mr Montana. 
 
Then he says: 
10 
“A partnership agreement between Prodigy and 
PRASA was signed on the 11 October.” 
And he annexures the agreement.  Do you confirm that that 
is in fact the agreement that …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And he makes the point that – or in 
the agreement, it is noted that you signed on behalf of 
PRASA. 
MR MONTANA:   The partnership agreement, Chair, I 
signed, yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Then he says: 
“Thereafter, on the 30 August 2011 an addendum 
was concluded with Mr Mpefo now signing on behalf 
of PRASA.” 
And that is annexure MMD5.  Do you confirm that? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 51 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, I confirm that, Chair, that is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then on 31 October 2012: 
“A further aspect was added to the agreement” 
And again he says you signed that part and that appears at 
page 179. 
MR MONTANA:   179? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Sorry, at page 177.  That is 
your signature there, is it? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.   
10 
MR MONTANA:   What …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, his signature is at what 
page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At page 177, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now he says as far as this part is 
concerned, you could go to page 174, Mr Montana.  You 
will see that this tells you what the cost is and right at the 
bottom of page 174 this says the cost per learner is 
R24 000 and the cost of 3 000 learners is R72 million. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   I am trying to – ja, on page 174. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   174, right at the bottom. 
MR MONTANA:   Right at the bottom, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   That is the agreement that we have been 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 52 of 362 
 
looking at that was signed by you. 
MR MONTANA:   Exactly, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right.  Now I just have in relation to 
– remember I asked you in regard to the 300 learners we 
agreed that the cost was R6 000 per learner. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now two things happened here and I 
am giving you the opportunity to explain.  One is, the 
number of learners increases from 300 to 3 000.  That is 
correct, is it not?  Now just in relation to that, as I 
10 
understood your evidence earlier, PRASA could be able to 
claim from SETA for the 300 learners.  Would it be able to 
claim in respect of these 3 000 learners as well? 
MR MONTANA:   All the training, Chair, PRASA would be 
able to claim for all the monies that – you remember this is 
now moving beyond the 300, Chair, that we spoke about 
earlier, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So although the numbers increased it 
would still be SETA that pays. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no, Chair.  It will not be SETA, it 
20 
will be PRASA that pays and will claim the money from the 
skills lady, as it were. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But what amount will it claim? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, so the regime, as I 
understand it, which you I think you explained to me is in 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 53 of 362 
 
respect of the 300 learners that Prodigy and the SETA 
agreed upon, Prodigy would not claim anything from 
PRASA in respect of the actual training but they would 
claim from the SETA because that is the arrangement. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, PRASA will claim – will still claim 
even …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR MONTANA:   PRASA will still claim for anything.  Any 
training that we do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   PRASA will claim the money for that 
training. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, let us take it step by step.  I 
am saying based on what I understood you to say to me 
earlier on, as far as the first 300 learners are concerned, I 
think you did indicate that for the actual training Prodigy 
would be paid by the SETA. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair.  What has happened here 
is that – let me explain, Chair.  One of the DVD(?) they say 
we want – we are giving you the learnerships.  It means 
20 
that money, Chair, that has been allocated for training is 
given to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Prodigy or PRASA? 
MR MONTANA:   PRASA, which is PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 54 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   But let us say they have got their own 
list. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   The database of their suppliers who 
present 
different 
training 
programmes. 
 
They 
have 
approved some and no approved some and these service 
providers will decide, Chair.  If you look in my, for 
example, affidavit, we deal with some of the training that 
Prodigy was doing for other agencies of the State.  But 
they went to the SETA, get that learnerships and they 
10 
award and they allocate them.  Now the training will 
happen, Chair.   
Now in this particular instance I have said – the 
point I made was that Prodigy then because of what was 
happening, it carried the cost, the initial cost of the 
training programme and when they wanted to claim from us 
they said no, but you have got – we have not yet come to 
that point, you can carry the cost until such time that we 
are able to – because you recall, Chair, this is the middle 
of the financial year.  Not all the cost – we had to shift the 
20 
cost for training from other training to allocate to this 
particular training. 
So, Chair, each and every training we do, even if 
we end up we paid someone, it means therefore that we 
can claim that money from the SETA. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 55 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I understand that part, I am still 
looking at what it means for Prodigy and the SETA that this 
training has come about not because PRASA approached 
the SETA or PRASA decided to do the training itself and 
then 
claim 
but 
that 
it 
came 
about 
because 
of 
the 
arrangement between Prodigy and the SETA. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So my earlier understanding of what 
you had said was that as far as the fees for Prodigy, if you 
can call them that, for the actual training, PRASA is not 
10 
liable, the SETA is liable because of the arrangement 
Prodigy made with the SETA.  But, even in regard to that, 
those 300, PRASA can put in its own claim – we did not go 
into the details – something that it can get but when it 
came to the additional learners outside of the 300, I 
understood that PRASA would pay – would conduct the 
training or get whoever to conduct it for them and then 
spend the money but claim from the SETA.  But I think 
based on what you have just said, that understanding of 
mine might not be accurate. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, in both instances PRASA would 
spend the money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Knowing that there is an agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 56 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   That letter that training has been ceded 
to it by Prodigy in this instance and that it goes on with the 
training knowing that there is 18 million in the kitty that it 
can claim back and to come back to PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the process of Prodigy getting paid, 
how does it happen?  What is the route. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you will see that in the first part 
but with the annexures, with the addendum rather, it is a 
completely different thing because we are dealing with – 
and let me say the 6 000 per learner… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   You remember that it is for a specific 
approved programme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Now what has happened in the Centre of 
Excellence, PRASA and Prodigy then engage and agreed 
on the nature of the programme that needs to be done.  
Okay, so that goes far beyond what, for example, was 
initially provided in the SETA award. 
 
Secondly, Chair, PRASA did not only train, it used 
20 
that training to train also people outside of its own ranks.  
For example, we were working with a number of community 
organisations.  So we say nominate people and bring them 
– let us also train them into part – so the numbers will go 
and they will get certification as well. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 57 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when all is said and done is the 
position that whether an employer conducts the training of 
its staff itself without a third party or it brings in a third 
party, ultimately the cost of the training, the bill gets 
footed by the SETA minus whatever they employer will 
claim from the SETA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed, Chair, but they will have to 
verify whether the training did indeed take place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   It is in line with whatever was provided 
10 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, but ultimately …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the SETA then. 
MR MONTANA:   There are two types of things, Chair, that 
perhaps I should explain.  There will be something like this 
where 
these 
guys 
will 
come 
and 
say 
we 
have 
got 
learnerships from SETA X, we have got this amount of 
money, can we use it at PRASA? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   And then there is the ongoing targets that 
we have in terms of training.  Now this is not a training – 
so over and above what Prodigy had proposed, PRASA had 
its own target in terms of training people which it also 
claimed from the Transport SETA as an example, Chair. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 58 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay.  No, thank you.  Mr 
Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in regard to the contract we are 
talking about at page 174, I mean, where the figure is at 
174, the figure for the learner is R24 000, the figure 
originally agreed with Prodigy was R6 000 per learner.  
That I can understand SETA would pay.  Would SETA still 
pay four times that amount for each learner if you claimed 
that from SETA? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, the SETA will still claim the 
10 
money but remember, the 18 million is linked to 300 
learners.  The specific basic training – that is for basic 
training that is there.  We took a decision that okay, we are 
going to have – we develop what you call My Station 
programme which was a programme to prepare our people.  
We said we are modernising PRASA, we need to have new 
employees, it cannot be only about new trains.  Even the 
people at stations and all the things, they must people who 
can respond to the challenges of the time. 
 
So we designed a completely new programme where 
20 
employees will come from all over the country and train.  
So what happens is that the 3 000 and the 300, it is not 
one and the same thing, Chair, and now I realise that 
perhaps what we should have done, with hindsight, we 
should not have called that an addendum(?).  It should 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 59 of 362 
 
have been dealt with basically as a – to say let us build on 
the centre but we enter a completely different agreement 
because I understand, Mr Soni, when 
you ask that 
question, is that you initiated a programme based on the 
300 and then you build on it, the numbers keep on 
increasing, the value keeps on going up but the amount, all 
of it, we are allowed to claim back from the SETA, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, this is what intrigues me, if I 
were the head of SETA, whichever SETA it is, I am told in 
the original agreement in 2010 that it costs R6 000 that 
10 
they will claim for each person trained and then in 2012 
they will claim R24 000 for each person claiming.  Why 
should I, as the head of SETA, pay you R24 000 when two 
years ago a SETA was paying R6 000? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed.  I think that, Chair, if it is a same 
programme, it is the same basis training and that has been 
increased in that way, yes, I think as a head of the SETA I 
would be intrigued.  But if it is a completely different 
programme I would say look, we are building on that, we 
are opening this centre, we are providing – I mean, one of 
20 
the things that we did, for example, in our centre, Chair, 
was to, in respect of the training for train drivers, we 
brought in one of the sophisticated machines where are 
drivers were trained – I think the word will come back now 
in my head – where similar to what you do when you train 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 60 of 362 
 
high loads or whatever, Chair, you create an environment 
where if drivers are driving a train, there is a lot of rain or 
whatever, 
so 
some 
of 
it 
highly 
advanced 
training 
programmes that comes into our Centre for Excellence.   
So it was no longer the same training programme, 
we built onto that, it was a much more sophisticated 
detailed programme that is there.  I think the word will 
come back, Chair, so that when you create a  - what is the 
word, it disappeared again from me – so pilots, for 
example, Chair, when they are trained, there is an artificial 
10 
situation created as part of that training.  We did the same, 
for example, the Centre of Excellence.   
It is not far, I have visited it quite a number of times 
I have addressed the employees who are attending that 
particular programme and the others took place around the 
country, as it were.  So Mr Soni is correct, Chair, but if it is 
the same terms, same training, yes, it should not do but it 
is a different training, we used that programme to expand 
and bring as many people as possible and get the 
advanced training.  That is what we chose to do, Chair, and 
20 
that was the innovation and the award that we got for the 
programme. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Who determines the amount of 
R24 000 for each trainee? 
MR MONTANA:   So this was negotiated between Prodigy 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 61 of 362 
 
and our HR department but because the numbers and the 
amounts were huge, required the approval of the CEO and 
that is why, Chair, you will see that when you see the work, 
what you referred to me, Mr Soni, the page 174, my 
signature.  After …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the bottom, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   174, I think, Chair, ja, where I – no, 177, 
sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   177. 
MR MONTANA:   177, it is my signature there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   As you can see, Chair, that there are 
PRASA who signed.  Who signed but because there are 
numbers are not the same as the numbers that were part of 
that initial scheme, it then required the approval of the 
Group CEO, Chair, and I have accordingly approved that 
because it was within my delegation of authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say I see that there are PRASA 
people who signed that, but I only see your signature.  
Only your signature at 177. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair, but I think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you talking about another page? 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, Chair, but I can see that on page, for 
example, 176.  So this was a memo.  Let us check in the 
front page who would have – okay, this is the actual 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 62 of 362 
 
agreement but there will be a memo accompanying this 
agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Explaining to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So but because it has budgetary impact 
beyond what was initially agreed, the team would motivate 
for me to sign and, Chair, that is why I accordingly 
approved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Approved the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you say there would have been a 
memo that accompanied the draft agreement? 
MR MONTANA:   The draft agreement, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The draft – Chair, there are two main 
players here.  Our HR department is the one that deals 
with the training issue.  I am speaking as if, Chair, I am 
still at PRASA.  At that time, Chair… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   So the – they will deal with the actual 
business of the training including the claiming from the 
scheme, that is an ongoing part of their functions.  The 
drafting of this and the vetting of the agreement will then 
be done by our legal department. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 63 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Which then both of them will be submitted 
to me, motivating – if I am unhappy of course I will not 
approve but if I am happy and I believe that there is value 
for money then I will approve like in this instance, Chair, I 
did approve.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think what I would like you to 
deal with, the 300 learners, the first lot, what were they – 
what skills were they being trained on or – I want to 
compare that you later on tell me about the 3 000 because 
10 
you have said that it is different programmes, that is fine, 
but I want to know what actually – what were the actual 
skills, were they being trained on or qualifications or 
whatever, I just want to get that, you know, like this one 
was – they were being trained to drive cars or they have 
been trained.  When you get – when you are being trained 
to drive a car it cost 6 000 but when you are being trained 
to drive a train, that is 24 000, that is the difference, that 
is what I am looking at. 
MR MONTANA:   I was giving that as an example, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   For some of the trainings …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I accept that, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the training for the initial group 
was what you call a basic training customer service for 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 64 of 362 
 
people to understand the importance of customer services 
in the business and all of those things.  I does not take you 
to the level where you acquire skills that could even take 
high in the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I guess customer service would like, 
you know, how important it is to smile when you serve a 
customer. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, during the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or to follow up if there are complaints 
and so on. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   During the 2006 World Cup, you 
remember the Germans were trained how to smile because 
they were regarded as people who are very serious and we 
were going to their country for the 2006 World Cup.  So, 
Chair, it will be basic about how do you treat your 
customers, your …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not speak on the phone while you are 
talking to a customer, that kind of thing. 
MR MONTANA:   To a customer.  But these were basic, 
part of the initial learnerships that were there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So it was basic, basic training that was 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But the awards that we did, Chair, were 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 65 of 362 
 
still accredited, though. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the basic, for the 3 000. 
MR MONTANA:   For the 300. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the 300, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So it is like someone who you are 
sending 
for 
a 
basic 
training 
course, 
they 
get 
their 
acknowledgement.   
The second part, Chair, was a much more detailed 
10 
one because it also teaches you about your business, the 
management of processes and all of those processes.  So 
the entire value chain about customer services and some 
of the technical skills that you require, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The people who would be eligible get 
onto the programme involving 3 000 compared to the 
categories of people who got onto the basic programme.  
Were there categories to say, for example, for the basic 
one 
we 
need 
people 
who 
fall 
within 
the 
following 
categories or who have got these qualifications, maybe 
20 
Matric, but maybe once you get to the second one, which is 
more expensive, we are looking at maybe some managers 
and so on.  Was there anything like that? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair, the - for example, access 
controllers, the people that you find when you come into a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 66 of 362 
 
station, the people who check your tickets, the first 
programme was targeted at those kind of people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   When you look at the second part of the 
programme, some of them targeted management – oh, by 
the way, access controllers but also the unemployed 
people, Chair, they got on that programme, people who are 
unemployed, organisation like South African commuter 
organisations will nominate people let us say from Orange 
Farm and everything and say we think that we will work 
10 
with commuters, we want these kind of basic skills and our 
people get certificates.  So that we will do, Chair, but when 
you look at the one that was costing on an average 24, you 
are even targeting higher people including those at the 
entry to management level, Chair, that were being trained.  
So that is why the cost would not have been the same, it 
would not have been the same level.  Even the intensity, 
Chair, because a two week basic programme will not be the 
same where a programme you run over a period of six 
months but again, it is dependent on releasing of people. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because one of the major things is that if 
you do it in modules because there are modules in these 
programmes, you find that one of the major things I 
remember was a big, big problem in this programme 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 67 of 362 
 
between our HR team and our customer services team, was 
with 
Prodigy, 
was 
the 
fact 
that 
PRASA 
signed 
an 
agreement but it does not release the people that have 
been identified to require this kind of programme. 
 
So they will say we, for example, have booked a 
place, we also secured facilitators who pitch up and 
sometimes there is half of the people that we require there 
and we have to do the programme twice or thrice because 
the same number of people instead of coming to one 
session, they come to two or three different sessions that 
10 
are there.  So, Chair, they were not the same programme.  
So the first one targeted access controllers, Chair, mainly, 
within the Metrorail environment.   
 
When I went to the Eastern Cape, Chair, for a road 
show with employees, I remember employees there who 
said why, we are part of Shosholoza Meyl, the intercity 
long distance, why are we not also being given the same 
kind of training?  And I remember that as a result of that, 
they head of Shosholoza Meyl operations, not the CEO but 
the 
guy 
who 
running 
operations, 
I 
think 
Mr 
Nelson 
20 
Mphailane, then wrote a letter requesting that, no, we have 
got our own people who must – who should be nominated 
and participate in the programme, as it were.   
So, Chair, there is a – I think there were a lot of ups and 
downs in the programme but was it a great programme for 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 68 of 362 
 
PRASA?  I think, as CEO, I will say it was one of the best 
programmes that were further implemented and that is why 
when in fact I was to travel to Vienna at the time Chair but 
I could not travel and one of our many executives travelled 
there to receive the award because the impact of that 
programme on making sure that you do not only modernise, 
because the key thing Chair is modernisation, that you are 
modernising your operations but the employees are not 
prepared, they needed to create a new person, a new 
employee, to be able to match to merge all of that.  
10 
So the centre of excellence, my station program, 
and the centre of excellence was aimed at achieving that 
Chair.  I do not know today as to whether PRASA is getting 
the benefit of those trainings, except that I did get a call 
from one of the Union saying you have trained our people, 
they did not get their own certificates.  What is happening, 
can these service provider provide and deliver that to us?  
But I said well that is a matter between PRASA and 
Prodigy to resolve, particularly with the disputes and the 
Court processes that are underway.  Chair there was value 
20 
for money, I was satisfied it was a good program for us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, did you say or was it just an example 
that the duration of the best program that is the program 
involving the 300 was for the two weeks and this one for 
the 3000 was six months or was those just examples? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 69 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   No, no examples I have given you 
examples Chair that you have models that run over, for 
example over a two-week program, for example over six 
and you would not manage them the same Chair.  But the 
first was for access controllers, basic training, and the 
other 
ones 
Chair 
moved 
to 
even 
the 
management 
excellence, entry level management excellence in our 
service, in our customer services part of the business.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you do you recall the duration in 
regard to both or you do not remember? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair not off hand.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not off hand. 
MR MONTANA:   But I know that when I visited, I was still 
given the files for training, and I still have them Chair and 
maybe it is something that I should share with the 
Commission to be able to evaluate this program Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I just want to clear 
three or four things, I know it is tea time but I thought I 
would just clear them.  Mr Dingiswayo says that in regard 
20 
to this program at page 174, the duration of the training 
was five days.  Do you agree? 
MR MONTANA:   Are you on page 175? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   174. 
MR MONTANA:   174? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 70 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The same one we were dealing with, 
yes, it is cost per learner 24,000 and cost of 3000.  You 
want to come back to that issue., after you…[intervene] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no I do not – no I am trying to see 
where 
in 
his 
affidavit 
is 
he 
saying, 
I 
am 
trying 
to…[intervene] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Actually, he says that - if you look at 
the second last line, on page 101, he says: 
“In effect this part of the contract required PRASA 
to pay R24 000, 00 per learner for a five-day 
10 
course.” 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair that that cannot be correct 
and I think Mr Dingiswayo is really trying to find fault in the 
program.  When you go into my affidavit Chair one of the 
things that I did not share, for example, you will see that 
even there has been quite a lot of engagement, some of 
the PRASA HR people who wanted for example, this 
program to be linked with some of the more advanced 
programs that were there and I think I detail some of 
those. 
20 
So the program Chair that was there was far bigger 
than that Chair and I am trying to find the specific part 
Chair on the - in my affidavit.  For example, one of the 
things is that our HR department and something that I 
intervened and fight about wanted Prodigy to enter into a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 71 of 362 
 
joint venture with another company called Talent Institute, 
which was already doing work for PRASA and say let us 
consolidate these particular programs.  
And that is why I am saying Chair if you apply the 
same principle, Mr Dingiswayo will say for example, we 
think let us say Talent Institute, which has been with 
PRASA doing work for PRASA for many years, which I 
actually questioned to say hey, are these people the only 
guys who are training in this environment?  So there were 
part because - you know, businesses the way they run 
10 
Chair, people create their own spaces, their own freedom 
because they get comfortable working with other people 
and they want to create all of that spaces.  
But Chair, the program was far bigger and that is 
why I shared the program – I shared the material so that 
the Commission will be able to see that, I think that what 
Mr Dingiswayo was trying to get to, is to try to reduce 
everything to that entry level program, and not deal with 
the program in its entirety and its complexity, Chair.  
But I think the training material that I provide, will 
20 
prove that they in fact, the higher you go there the complex 
the program became, Chair. 
 CHAIRPERSON:   And did you say when the training took 
place he had not joined…[intervene] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 72 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   …he had not joined PRASA? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, when we - when the first group of 
people 
graduated 
training, 
we 
were 
actually 
wearing 
gowns, because this was accredited - with 300 employees, 
I still have pictures, some of our employees there, they 
wrote letters to me Chair, which are employees who have 
never been to school, but were taken through this program, 
and they felt quite, you know, that they are – here is a 
business that is taking care of them, and that they even 
them they throughout they can gain the experience to go 
10 
through the system and be something else.  
Because once you got the first one, it means Chair 
that he in fact, you can also be nominated for the higher 
forms.  So it was aimed at ensuring that you do not become 
an access controller for the rest of your life, Chair.  Let me 
say lastly Chair, that when I joined the SRCC and we 
incorporated Metrorail in 2006, one of the biggest problems 
we found was that there were a lot of employees who have 
worked for Metrorail, I think the numbers was plus minus 
4000.  
20 
They have worked some of them for 10 to 12 years, 
they were treated as temporary staff.  They never received 
this kind of training and most of those people became 
access controllers because I went to the Board and say 
here is the financial implications but these people can 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 73 of 362 
 
never be access controllers, temporary employees for the 
rest of their life.  
So we then incorporated, they became access 
controllers, and most of them became part of this program.  
When we made them a full time Chair, you would not 
believe how that changed people's lives.  For the first time 
someone is able to go to a bank and say I am applying for 
a student loan for my kids, I am able to apply for a home.  
Fortunately, I was receiving those, those letters there and I 
said, for me, that is what made me wake up Chair and look 
10 
forward to going to work at PRASA because I knew that my 
employees -  I mean, when I came here Chair on Friday, 
the messages they sent to me, some of them were saying 
[speaking in vernacular], whatever they say we have got a 
permanent job, we have got a roof over our heads for the 
first time, because you fought for us in that business. 
So Chair, I think maybe anomalies will always be 
contradictions a source of development and we should not 
be afraid of that but I think for me the question and I was 
not involved, because these people are not trained by me.  
20 
I went to open maybe one or two of the sessions that were 
there. In the same way that when our employees for 
example, some of the senior managers we targeted we 
send them to Gibbs to be trained, because this is what we 
saying that we wanted you to become now the next level of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 74 of 362 
 
leadership in the organisation.  
Now before Gibbs, take them through the business 
training, I come then tell them what is PRASA, what kind of 
business are we trying to do and Chair we dedicated a bit 
of time for that.  So yes, anomalies may be there but was it 
a good program for our entry level staff at customer 
services and later for the management echelons at the 
entry level, I think Chair it was one of the best programs 
ever.  I do not agree with Mr Dingiswayo’s assessment but 
yes, I think his got the right to identify shortcomings that 
10 
were there but it does not make them criminal.  I think for 
him Chair his trying to link the training to Moodley and that 
is the problem.  
If you start in that way, we are going part ways 
because there was no Moodley when I signed that letter.  
So I am taking responsibility that this program, ultimately, 
there are employees that passed, that GM’s who approved 
certain things Chair but the overall program was endorsed 
by me as a Group Chief Executive and I am confirming that 
to you Chair, today. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Just 
one 
final 
question 
Chairperson…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, sure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because I do not want us 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 75 of 362 
 
to…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This Prodigy contract was not linked 
to the World Cup at all. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no this came after the World Cup. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, I just wanted to - because I 
heard you say something about the World Cup and then 
getting our…[intervene] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just did not want there to be a link 
10 
between this…[intervene] 
MR MONTANA:   But this was linked to creating the new 
business.  So remember before 2010 Chair, 2010 was very 
important for us, because we had invested a lot, but we did 
not create the new PRASA, Chair.  
We were refurbishing and one of the major things 
post 2010 we took a very important strategic decision that 
we no longer want to refurbish old trains, we do not want 
to paint the old trains that we know that they do not 
represent the future.  We are going to capitalise this 
20 
business, we want to recapitalise so we said we are 
moving 
away 
from 
refurbishment 
to 
recapitalisation, 
instead of refurbishing trains – it does not mean we are not 
going to refurbish at all but the key thrust we are going to 
invest in new trains, Chair, we took that decision.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 76 of 362 
 
The result of that is that factory that we see in 
Dunnottar in Nigel where you know Chair I was so proud 
when I saw His Excellency, our President, taking investors 
and say South Africa has got a manufacturing plant and I 
know Chair that I was the champion behind that, and when 
I see investors say, if you want to build a trains, not only 
for South Africa, but for even countries in the Southern 
Hemisphere like Brazil, like Australia, South Africa can 
actually build those trains in the factory that we built.  You 
know, one thing Chair why I defend PRASA so vehemently, 
10 
I said people come in here and say money was paid, okay.  
It was paid even in advance but we do not see any value.  
Chair, I want to assure you, there is no single 
PRASA project whether you deal with this new rolling 
stock, you deal with the farm boy, you deal with Prodigy, 
where you find that we spend money and you cannot show 
and say this is what we did.  With Swifambo for example 
the country can say here are the locomotives we are using 
them, and other saying they are too tall. They are not 
saying they are no locomotives; they're running in the 
20 
tracks.  
The commuter trains we spent R50billion, we can 
show them, we can point them - the training Chair, I took 
Minister Ndebele the first 300 of the employees that were 
trained by Prodigy. Minister Ndebele in Boksburg. He 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 77 of 362 
 
actually was the main speaker, and he was surrounded – 
pictures are there, this is actual work we did not just take 
people and pretended and put down, this were our 
employees 
Chair 
who 
benefited 
from 
that 
particular 
program. 
So I think Chair, that is the one difference about 
PRASA the point - as point the shortcomings, and there are 
probably many, but there are also many achievements that 
we have recorded, but we will never have an instance 
where you say Chair, like you say but money has been 
10 
spent and we do not know, at PRASA I can take you, you 
can walk with me Chair anywhere and say we spend 
R100million there here  is the result of all of that and that 
is why I will always be an Ambassador for PRASA, even if I 
do not work for that organisation, Chair. 
Even now with the difficulties, let me indicate Chair, 
now with the difficulties I have said to the Board of PRASA 
I am not looking for work but I have offered Chair I said I 
am prepared to give you two or three days, even if I do not 
come to the office, sitting from home.  If you want me to 
20 
analyse some of your reports, and advise on the kind of 
strategies, I am available because this is our country 
Chair, I do not want to see PRASA going down because I 
am no longer CEO, I want to see PRASA thriving, because 
first and foremost, I am thinking about our Parkwood, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 78 of 362 
 
Woolworths. 
So I keep on buying their Chair, the employees look 
at me and sometimes I take my daughter, they play with my 
daughter.  One day as I was leaving Parkwood recently 
Chair, they all crowded, they were crowding me and I 
thought I was going to be beaten by these employees and 
they were saying but we live in Soweto and we used to 
take a train from Naledi to Park Station and then take a 
short taxi and that we could save a lot of money for our 
families.  
10 
Trains are no longer there, we are paying even 
double more than our salary just to go to work.  So, Chair 
those are the people that we - that I think about.  So the 
country has given me some skills, I may be fighting with 
the leadership today but the skills I will use to the benefit 
of our people and I made that offer Chair not to the 
Minister but to the Board and say if one day you feel that I 
should assist you feel free to come and give me the 
material.  
And for example now the infrastructure has gone 
20 
Chair, we need to restore it and I think that is something 
that I am prepared – if you find and you may find serious 
findings against me Chair, I am not saying you would 
perhaps one of the of the things as a mitigating factors say 
had committed to continue working for the country, say, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 79 of 362 
 
five years, we sentence you, instead of hard labour, go and 
assist the country in railways, that is what I will do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but the point you were making about 
value for money is you are saying, we have heard of 
situations where people are given contracts to build 
houses, and you will find that the money has been given to 
them, they have been paid but when you say where are the 
houses, they cannot show you the houses they built.  
So 
you 
are 
saying 
whatever 
difficulties 
or 
challenges may be pointed out in regard to PRASA the one 
10 
thing that cannot be said, as far as you are concerned, is 
to say, but where is what was supposed to be done with the 
money, that is the point you were making. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I put my head on the block, each 
and every manual project that we have done that were 
within my monitoring screen, all of them Chair have been 
done.  They are not perfectly but I think that we have done 
tremendous 
work 
and 
part 
of 
me 
coming 
to 
this 
Commission is to ensure that the true story of PRASA is 
told 
Chair 
and 
not 
to 
deny 
any 
shortcomings 
or 
20 
weaknesses but to say the real PRASA known amongst our 
people should be the one that we present here today, 
Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take the tea adjournment it is 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 80 of 362 
 
about twenty minutes past we will resume at quarter to 
twelve. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair.  Mr Montana I just want 
to finalise my concerns about the pro – the contract and I 
want to go back to page 174.  You will see there it is a R72 
10 
million contract right.  You agree?  Page 174. 
MR MONTANA:  174. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes on the left hand side you will see. 
MR MONTANA:  Answering the question (inaudible) R72 
million Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Now that is not a small sum of money 
whatever goods or services one is procuring you agree? 
MR MONTANA:  I accept Chair I do. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I have looked at the terms of the 
contract because I accepted what Mr Dingiswayo had said 
20 
that it supplied their program.  Now this is the difficulty I 
have. 
MR MONTANA:  Which I rejected. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, no, no I understand.  This is the 
difficulty I have I have looked at the – the agreement it does 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 81 of 362 
 
not seem to reflect what Prodigy’s obligations are in regard 
to the training that they would provide.  Would the training 
be five days, would it be ten days, would it be twenty days?  
I am talking about the agreement itself.  Would you agree 
with me? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair perhaps not in the – in that level of 
detail but I will tell you from where I was sitting some of the 
things other than the training of course.  You remember there 
was also catering for all our employees that were there and 
Chair I think – I think maybe what Mr Dingiswayo confused I 
10 
am not responding to him but I am just answering you in that 
way was the fact that there were some levels where we were 
doing a lot of theoretical training.   
There were – and I think that is when we brought in 
people together into one place which I think the total days 
for example for that period we are training was – was in the 
order of twenty days.  The – one of the things for example on 
this program Chair particularly where we were dealing with I 
think the management levels.  If I remember well it was 
Level – Level 4 and 5.   
20 
Once they have gone through the program then 
Prodigy for example will assign what we call a mentor to be 
able to make sure that what this person has been trained is 
able to apply that in the work space.  So – so the point I am 
making Chair I am saying that maybe his did not but I think 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 82 of 362 
 
that for me I had an understanding of what this program 
needs to deliver.  Whether they did that fully, completely 
Chair it is a different matter but – but when we approved this 
program and Chair let – by the way I am reminded of one 
thing or rather two things.   
I was looking for a word at our centre 00:03:45 so we 
installed a simulator so that we could simulate some of this 
so that the drivers can see a 00:03:51 when for example 
there is fork and everything, different conditions.  Part of 
that in the centre of excellence even though there was no 
10 
drunk done by Prodigy but the centre of excellence was 
meant to be a model that we use throughout the business for 
that purpose.   
One of the main reasons why the discussion between 
PRASA and Prodigy was the fact that they were in fact at 
that time if I remember well the only entity that was 
accredited with the Passenger Rail training modules which 
they in fact they ended up doing for the Transport SETA as 
well.  So there were reasons and I think Chair I was very 
clear at an overall level what was their duty, what was 
20 
Prodigy supposed to do?  And most importantly I saw the 
great 00:04:40 with my own eyes.  I gave them the 
certificate, I shake their hands and I think for me that was 
the most important thing – it was a proud moment for our 
employees Chair. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 83 of 362 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Montana I am asking an entirely 
different question and I understand that you are pleased with 
the program and I am not saying you are not entirely 
00:04:58.  The question I am asking is as one fifth year with 
a R72 million contract one says okay but if there is a dispute 
how is that dispute going to be resolved?  So let me just tell 
you what I have looked at and I would like you to look at 
page 173 under the heading Phase PRASA My Station 
Customer Service Skills Program Implementation Agreement 
– Engagement Phase and you will see there it says, 
10 
“Content phase, implementation of PRASA 
My Station Customer Service Skills Program 
training sessions.  The theoretical session is 
five days.  149 groups of 20 learners each.  
We 
have 
accommodated 
– 
we 
have 
accommodated for more groups. This will be 
a ten day program conducted over a three to 
six month period.” 
 
This is what I do not understand then what – how do 
you say to them but you were supposed to do five days, ten 
20 
days, twenty days?  It is not written in the program do you – 
I mean in the – in the contract, do you agree? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair yes but if you look at the – if you look 
at the table Chair you have got the project activity, you got 
deliverables and at the end it tells you who is responsible.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 84 of 362 
 
Kadishe – that is Mr Soni where it says Prodigy is 
responsible for that, Prodigy is responsible for that then say 
Prodigy and PRASA so I think perhaps maybe Chair we – we 
– the way it has been captured it may not have been – I 
would concede to that – I will not take issue with that.  But I 
think that from the table that Mr Soni is referring to it 
actually has got three sections activity, deliverables and the 
responsible party in that agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana I have got no difficulty.  This is 
– this is my difficulty.  R72 million of tax-payers money now 
10 
we say that Prodigy is responsible.  PRASA says somebody 
in PRASA you or whoever you not delivering.  How does one 
determine what in terms of the contract because this is not a 
– a – this is a contract that requires the production of certain 
things for payment of R72 million.  Do you agree that it is not 
in the – in the agreement what Prodigy should do?  I know it 
is responsible but if there is a dispute. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair maybe Chair I think for me it is very 
clear.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you respond I just want 
20 
to make sure I understood the question.  Just repeat the 
question Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  I say Chairperson that the – we know that 
Prodigy is to provide training.  That is the deliverable as 
they call it in the business world.  Now if there is a dispute 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 85 of 362 
 
about whether it has delivered or not they – Mr Montana 
understood that they will have training for each person over 
twenty days in the six month period.  But Prodigy provides 
training for twelve days and there is a dispute about it.  One 
cannot turn to the – to the contract to say no but you are 
supposed to provide twenty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – I see that in – at page 173 there is 
a column there that says this is – this will be a ten day 
program conducted over a three to six month period eish 
then I must complete the program in a maximum of six 
10 
months. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now is the question that that is not said in 
the contracts it should have been in the contract or is the 
question a different one? 
ADV SONI SC:  Well the question is it says – it starts off by 
saying the theoretical session is five days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV SONI SC:  The – the sentence before that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Says the theoretical session is five days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then it says this will be a ten day program. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Conducted over a three to six month period. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 86 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Each learner must complete the program in 
a maximum of six.  But what it does not say is whether the 
five days the theoretical days is included in the ten days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And I – so I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is not about where – where the point 
is made – where the issue is covered it is about whether it is 
clear or vague. 
ADV SONI SC:  Well that is the only point I want to make. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the only point okay.  Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair – Chair I think – look at the time when 
I look at the – I hear what Mr Soni is saying but at the time 
you it says the theoretical issue which means the theoretical 
part of the training. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  For – will take – it would be for five days 
and 149 groups of 20 learners each and Chair it tells you the 
kind of activity that is supposed to take place there and that 
– and that that theoretical work Chair if so – if they are 
20 
called for five days but over a period of six months Chair 
they do that training.   
The point that I think Mr Soni is making that the 
contract maybe does not provide and I have said that there 
are 
disputes for example about the release of – of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 87 of 362 
 
employees by PRASA and you will see there is a grey area 
where PRASA said but it was her job to make sure that the – 
you ask for them.  And this guy say but it was your duty to 
make sure that as an employer that they are released.   
So yes there are those kinds of grey areas Chair but I 
think that in terms of clear deliverables I think that the – as 
far as I am concerned Chair they are quite detailed in this.  
And by the way let us not look at what we have in front of us 
Chair an isolation from the partnership agreement as well as 
the thing because this is just a detailed activity now beyond 
10 
what we – what I had signed.   
Because the partnership agreement I signed did not 
have that level of detail Chair but if you go further down with 
the addendums and even the amounts those are detailed in 
the – in the contracts.  Are they covered enough that if there 
is that kind of a problem I will concede Chair I would take up 
issues with that.  I would not – I would not argue that it is 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will tell you what my initial understanding 
is Mr Soni and of course if it becomes a serious issue one 
20 
can look at it and so on.  I understand the theory – the five 
days of theory to be part of the ten days because they say 
this will be a ten day program.  So I understand that to say 
in total this program requires ten days.   
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 88 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when in the earlier sentence they say 
the theoretical session is five days I take that to mean the 
ten day – the ten days is divided into two.  The theoretical 
session and maybe what I would call the practical session. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – that is my initial understanding. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is what I understood as well Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Because you know I am just trying in the 
sense to say. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  That – and it was in answer to matters Mr 
Montana raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Where he said well it was longer than five 
days.  But we now know it is ten days and so we have 20 
learners.  149 sessions and each learner to pay R24 000.00 
for ten days.  That is – that is effectively. So it may not be 
five days but nevertheless it is R24 000.00 for ten days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  And if we can put a figure on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no, no Chair. No. no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no.  Okay let us correct that.  Chair I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 89 of 362 
 
think we are picking up. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Obviously 
Mr 
Soni 
is 
giving 
his 
understanding. 
MR MONTANA:  His understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Now I am giving my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja give us your understanding. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair no the program was not ten days for 
R24 000.00.  We are talking about the theoretical path of – 
your remember that talking about the number of other 
10 
activities for examples those at Level 4 and 5. They will not 
do the stuff but they will do entry things to management as 
one example Chair.   
So – so this type – this ten days we are referring to – 
we are referring to the groups – the 149 groups of 20 
learners each which they can I think Chair you summarised it 
properly that the theoretical part could be less than ten days 
in five days.   
So it means people must come together at one place 
for that theory for that week and then come later on.  But if 
20 
you look at the entire activity we are talking about an activity 
of cause for specifically their theoretical session.  They say 
it will take between three to six months.   
Now that is not – that paragraph does not define the 
totality of the training Chair it is – it refers to a specific 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 90 of 362 
 
aspect of the program.  The program was – was if you look 
at that I mean people were – people were trained some of 
them for a period of over a year.  So – so I am simply saying 
that do not reduce this training to that block.  That block 
simply suggest a – one activity amongst many Chair.   
That is why I was saying earlier on one of the things 
that I will do because I will not go through each one of them.  
I mean when you place a mentor you train Lucky Montana 
you place him back to his 00:16:17.   
You know one of the things about this – this thing 
10 
Chair when somebody travels let us say on a train he is 
dealing with customer service for he is at the station we 
require these mentors to be there with the people.  You 
calculate the number of – now that is beyond – that is 
beyond the what is it called?  The – the theoretical training 
around that.  And then the guys where the higher level of 
management and Chair I think that is the much more 
advanced and it is like when you get to investigate to do a 
management size that is why we start – we will start you 
from – and who are the people who evaluating and assessing 
20 
these people Chair?   
Those 
are 
not 
their 
managers 
it 
was 
actually 
resources that were brought in by Prodigy into the business 
to do exactly that.  So – so I am saying the R24 000.00 
covers a whole range of activities and not simply what you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 91 of 362 
 
were reading that – in that block Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – with what you have just said I am 
not sure that my earlier understanding as I articulated it is 
correct because you are saying to me the ten days 
mentioned here for the program is not the whole program.  
You say it is one – maybe one activity there were many 
others.  So – so you say in other words you say this ten day 
program was one part of a larger program. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes this was a theory training part Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  The theory only. And the other activities 
Chair you will see that they are… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they say the theory is five days.  So it 
cannot – the theory cannot be for ten days.  Or at least this 
is what this says. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes they say that the – that – so which 
means a session – one session – so if we define that for five 
days so that will be a session.  So it says that so it could be 
this would be a ten day program and I think you summarised 
correctly Chair when you said it means one session could be 
20 
five days and you come later on and do another five days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes what I – what my understanding was is 
that program over which should take ten days would have a 
theoretical part and a practical part 00:19:02 just to contrast 
it with the theoretical part.  The theoretical part was 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 92 of 362 
 
allocated five days of the ten days and then the rest which is 
five days would be let us now do pod casts let us see 
whether you understood the theory and you go and do the 
work and then maybe we can observe or whatever.  Or the 
simulation that you were talking about maybe to say now we 
have given you the theory now let us – show us how you do 
this following the theory that you have been taught.  That – 
that was my understanding.  You say that is still fine? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair my understanding Chair is that you 
have the ten days the entire ten days even if you do them in 
10 
two blocks of five days – five days is the theoretical part.  It 
does not involve the practical part of the program. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  That is why I am saying to Mr Soni that that 
block – that box that he is referring to is not a totality of the 
program.  For example if you deal with mentors and I think 
that there is a full range of activities Chair in the – you see 
Chair this addendum is actually trying to give effect to the 
partnership agreement.  Because that detail you will not find 
it in the partnership agreement and I think Chair that the – 
20 
so I am simply saying that you will see that when you go 
through each and every box you are find the project activity 
beyond the ten days for theory and that the – the other 
activities is not listed in that box.  So the R24 000.00 does 
not relate to that box it refers to people would have been 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 93 of 362 
 
trained over a period I will say between three months to a 
year into that program with a ten days only on theory 
particularly for those entry levels Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is going to be necessary because I 
think it is important particularly because I think Mr Soni was 
asking in order to assess the amount of R24 000.00 per 
learner in terms of – in relation to the content of the – of the 
training.  So it is going to be important that we have – I have 
a full picture.  So I do not know to what extent all the 
documentation 
that 
is 
here 
– 
to 
what 
extent 
the 
10 
documentation we have here is everything to what extent 
there might be documentation as well it would help us 
understand 
and 
obviously 
if 
Mr 
Montana 
you 
have 
documentation at home that could assist that would help me 
– helpful. Because the difficulty I have at the moment with 
what you are saying is that it seems to me to be not in 
accordance with what he says but it may be that that is 
because I am looking at this document only.  Once I see 
other documents I might see the point you making. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I provide some of those – that detail 
20 
in my annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your – yes. 
MR MONTANA:  In my affidavit so I think that – I will send 
the things separately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 94 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  To enhance that understanding Chair thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Finally Mr Montana on this contract can I 
just ask you who drew up this contract PRASA or Prodigy? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think the contract was – was drawn 
up by Mr Lindikaya Zide who as the company secretary and 
was responsible for legal things in PRASA and that is the 
submission – that is where I got it Chair.  So whether they 
drafted it or vetted it I think – ja – but it came from there. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay.  I am going to suggest when one looks 
at this that it is a Prodigy document but that is neither here 
nor there because my next question is this.  Before you 
signed did you take legal advice from the PRASA people? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair.  Chair I think let me actually give 
you the process that we follow because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I am sorry has he finished – have you 
finished your question? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  So the answer is yes but let me take this 
opportunity to indicate how we – how we – you see for me as 
CEO I deal with a lot of things and when somebody deals 
with a program they want to – to motivate for its approval.  
They write memos Chair.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 95 of 362 
 
They put together a memo motivating also the – put 
in for that wants a benefit for a business whether we have 
got a budget for it and all of those things Chair.  And the 
legal advice you will you – the legal people will you tell you 
for example and say no we are not – we are not happy with it 
Chair.  In some instances and I think when we deal maybe 
with the Siyangena matter you will see for example Chair 
that we for the later contracts we use a standard contract 
that is used for example in the industry.  We sign that 
contract.   
10 
Someone would say it does not come from PRASA 
but that is different Chair to – to – you know this one is 
different because we did it.  If you look at when I deal with 
the Werksmans issue Chair when you look at the letter of 
engagement that PRASA signed that was signed by Mr Nathi 
Khena is a letter that is written by Werksmans on its 
letterhead.   
It provides the time and everything and what PRASA 
did was say sign and the person who signed on behalf of 
PRASA Nathi Khena he did not even sign it receiving it from 
20 
the legal team.  He signed it at the – at the restaurant in a 
shop.  So – so Chair this is in my affidavit.   
So I think that maybe what Mr Dingiswayo Chair was 
trying to say was that when he came he found this in place 
but I think it would be better if the commission were to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 96 of 362 
 
actually ask the former head of legal, the former company 
secretary Mr Linkiya ZIde and say were you involved, did you 
draft this contract and all of those things?  It came from 
there Chair and I am saying I am giving the commission a 
specific name.   
This Mr Mphephu Ramuda who was our acting HR 
executive. Let us ask him Chair.  There is a lady in Cape 
Town who was part of the customer services team Ms Valerie 
– I cannot recall her surname we were part of all of those 
things Chair and I think each of these employees can be 
10 
asked to depose to an affidavit to the commission and they 
will see – you will see Chair that between the time we 
started and maybe the time that Mr Dingiswayo dealt with 
this matter it is a completely different worlds Chair.   
So Mr Soni made Chair a very serious statement that 
it is a Prodigy document not a PRASA document and of 
course I am the one whose being asked questions I should 
not be asking questions but I thought it will be fair if Mr Soni 
were to tell me the basis of his statement Chair.  Is he 
saying that I was – I was misled as CEO with this document?  
20 
So we need to find out what exactly is a concern Chair 
because I am saying as a CEO I am taking responsibility for 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no that is fine Mr Soni will 
mention but as I understand your position it should not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 97 of 362 
 
matter from your point of view whether it is a Prodigy – it 
came from Prodigy or from PRASA as long as the content 
was acceptable.  In other words the terms and conditions 
were acceptable there is no issue with you because you say 
there were others which were signed like that or did I 
misunderstand? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair you know Chair my – part of the 
problem that difficulty with people working with me I like to 
get into detail and I write. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  And that is why when I come to the 
commission I cannot say hey it was junior employee who 
signed.  I signed and that is why I can talk about it here.  So 
Chair I will assure you that if it means I stay the whole night 
reading this thing that is what I will do and if I am not happy 
with it I will indicate change there and there and I am 
satisfied here Chair the Prodigy make business. They were 
not doing this thing for Mahala Chair.  There is no doubt that 
Prodigy was doing business.  Do you think we got – we are 
getting the benefit of this program?  I am saying that I am 
20 
satisfied there that we did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but basically your answer to my 
question is yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Mr Soni. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 98 of 362 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana you – you heard Chairperson 
say at the end of the day it does not matter who drew it up.  I 
am a lawyer I look at documents and I says between this 
company and this company who is likely to have drawn it up.  
It was not an indictment of you and that specific to why I 
asked you did you take legal advice because I have 
indicated 
to 
you 
that 
Prodigy’s 
deliverables 
are 
not 
expressed and I – you have seemed to have conceded so 
when I ask you did you take legal advice it is simply on the 
basis that a R72 million contract should not be concluded 
10 
without legal advice whoever drew up the contract. 
MR MONTANA:  Mr Soni I did not concede that the 
deliverables – the deliverables are here Chair and I think 
that we have how many pages of deliverable?  I have said 
that we have got a document which indicates one project 
activity deliverables and responsibilities.  At the end… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think what you – what you – what you 
conceded or may have conceded is there may be some 
vagueness about whether… 
MR MONTANA:  Absolutely – absolutely Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja about the duration. 
MR MONTANA:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I understood you also to say as far as 
you are concerned the deliverables are there. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 99 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is a column that says deliverables.  
There is a column that says responsible. 
MR MONTANA:  Person ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Person ja.  Okay  Mr Soni we… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Montana we must move on.  Can I 
now ask you to look at 14.2 please on page 102? 
MR MONTANA:  102? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  This is Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit. 
MR MONTANA:  Affidavit ja.  Page 102.  That is where I am, 
Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   14.2. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mister ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we now moving away from that 
partnership/agreement? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Then...  I heard Mr Montana say 
20 
that Mr Dingiswayo suggests, maybe by implication, I am 
not sure, that that training arrangement should have gone 
out to open tender.  Is that something that is an issue or 
not? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am going to come to ...[intervenes]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 100 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you will come to it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now he says at 14.2: 
“In or about February or March 2015, I was 
asked by the Contracts Manager at SCM, 
Mr Sidney Khuzwayo to draft an agreement to 
reinstate and extent two earlier contracts...” 
 
Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I was not but my – later on 
10 
when I saw some of the documents in respect of this 
matter, I noted that point, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  And you accept that he was 
asked to extend those two earlier contracts? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I am saying that I saw that tin the 
documents.  I do not know what was driving it but you will, 
for example, that when I answered that question later, I 
deal with it later.  I think, in fact, Chair, I deal with it in my 
affidavit that what has happened here.   
 
Mr Dingiswayo is describing a specific process 
20 
with people at the SCM but I am suggesting that beyond 
that, there was something where they have identified and 
he said, certain entities and had then allocated to himself 
powers to block, for examples, contracts that were there 
that he felt were irregular and it was not doing that 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 101 of 362 
 
consistently.   
 
So the interaction – in fact, in one of my emails, 
I am not sure if they have attached – if it is attached here, 
Chair.  I take up issues with him and with Mr Khuzwayo.  
And I will take you there.  It is my email has been 
attached, Chair.  Because already at that time, we were 
honestly ...[indistinct].   
 
Things were happening that you would go to 
Legal or Legal would come and say we have reviewed this 
contract and decided that this contract is irregular.  Then 
10 
Finance would then be told do not make payments.  That is 
not how an organisation works, Chair.  Legal is a 
supporting function.  It does not run the business.   
 
Legal, for example, they would advice business, 
the people who are running that particular project and in 
this particular case it will be Group HR, Human Capital 
Management.  And if I am happy they will then elevate that 
to me and say:  Group CEO, we think there is a problem 
with this particular contract and lease(?) those and then 
make a recommendation.   
20 
 
Chair, in all these contracts that they will review 
and take decisions, there was never one instance where 
our Group Legal wrote a memo and said:  Mr Montana, we 
think there is a problem.  And then I reject what they were 
saying.  Here they are attacking me and they cannot 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 102 of 362 
 
produce one of evidence to say that we have brought that 
to the attention of the Group CEO and he did not support 
us.  Or we picked up a corruption and he did not act on it.  
It never happened, Chair.   
 
I am making that point very strongly in my 
affidavit that Mr Dingiswayo has a right to say I am picking 
up issues that makes me uncomfortable.  But the process 
of dealing of that, do not fight political battles, do not 
target people.  If you are a true professional, document 
that, give them to an immediate supervisor.  In this case it 
10 
would have been Ms Ngoye.   
 
And if that is not, then they elevate to the Group 
CEO.  It was never done Chair.  And what happens is that 
we have made commitments and that is why PRASA today 
is so involved in so many litigation precisely because of 
this approach, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But your response to 14.2, is that you do 
not know whether he was asked by Mr Khuzwayo to do 
what he says he was asked to do but you noted?  Or you 
say you do know that he was asked? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I did see the email exchanges 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...between the – not only the two of them 
but a number of people.  But who initiated it? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 103 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   I would not say with certainty, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  He then continues and I am 
still at 14.2. 
“After reviewing the matters, I raised a number 
of compliance issues...” 
 
Were you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair.  No, he never raised with me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja-no, I do not think he says he 
10 
raised it with you.  He was asked by the contracts manager 
and it seems that he raises it with them.  And then he goes 
on to say: 
“However, on the 1 s t of April, Prodigy sent an 
email to the office of the Trio(?) asking about 
outstanding payments...” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Are you referring to the last sentence 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   ...of 14.2? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The answer is either yes or no, 
Mr Montana whether sent the email or not. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 104 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair.  I cannot recall exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I am not denying it but I cannot recall 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct] perfectly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then at 14.3 he says: 
“I later raised questions about certain issues 
relating 
to 
the 
drafting 
of 
the 
proposed 
10 
agreement 
and 
said 
until 
these 
were 
addressed 
I 
will 
not 
begin 
drafting 
the 
agreement...” 
 
Were you aware that that was his position? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I was not aware but let us assume 
14.3 is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   It was not up to mister – it was not up to 
him to decide whether to draft or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   That is why he had a duty to elevate to 
the right person and to engage business and if as a 
business we come to the conclusion that we are agree with 
what – the concerns you are raising, then it is fine.  But 
Mr Dingiswayo in his position as a General Manger did not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 105 of 362 
 
have the authority to say what he is saying in 14.3.  It – if 
we are – we run a business that way, Chair, then we are 
going to have a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say he was not the right person to 
say whether he should draft or not without raising his 
concerns up to the highest level if necessary? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I am saying firstly.  He had a 
right to raise to those concerns ...[intervenes]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that he said he had identified. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But the decision is not his. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   He had to decide, for example to say:  I 
am going to raise this with my immediate boss and I am 
also 
going 
to 
raise 
that 
with 
the 
Executive, 
Group 
Executive responsible for HR in the business. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And if there is an agreement there, then 
that is the route to take. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is where it ends. 
MR MONTANA:   That is where it ends.  If they say:  No, 
we agree with you.  You do not draft an agreement.  But if 
they say:  No, no, no.  We think you are wrong.  We – this 
is a strategy that we are following as a business.  It is not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 106 of 362 
 
up to you decide that I would not be just in the agreement.  
And there is a second matter, Chair, that I am raising, 
consistent with 14.3 and if I may raise it now?  It is in my 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, when we – when the former Group 
Executive 
for 
Legal 
who 
was 
– 
who 
brought 
Fani 
Dingiswayo to the business, left the company.  We said – 
we reached an agreement that we would part ways.  We 
had a separation agreement.  This was facilitated by our 
10 
HR, Group HR function together with Legal.  So this was 
done.  So we signed. 
 
Then we reached agreement that should go – 
then we will part ways on certain terms.  We signed and 
everything went...  Then – she then came back, the 
Executive of Seta(?).  She then said:  Look, there are 
certain things that I thought are standard even if they are 
not in this particular contract that you signed.  I was not 
leaving them out.   
 
So the money that you want to pay for me – to 
20 
me, okay.  It should be declared a dispute with PRASA.  
Our Group HR brought to my attention at that time that:  
Look, they have asked Legal to help them with the case.  
Again, consistent with 14.3.  He – she refused to assist 
business in this issue, Chair.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 107 of 362 
 
 
So here you got someone who believes that he 
has got the right to decide whatever he wants in the 
business.  He is not accountable and he can – he is my 
former boss.  I am not going to represent the interest of 
the business.  Because his duty owes his loyalty to us.  He 
has got a duty to protect the business.   
 
And if business, in this case Group Human 
Capital, asks him and say:  We want you to help us in this.  
He cannot say:  I am not going to draft an agreement or I 
am not going to brief council or there to take up this issue.  
10 
So Chair, I have a problem with that.  And that is why when 
I called Dingiswayo to my office I said:  You have done this 
not one issue but on a number of issues.   
 
And the reason why you are doing it, Chair, and 
you will not understand the context, Chair.  Can I ask for 
indulgence?  Because I want to go a bit one step back, 
Chair, so that I can assist ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   ..the Chair so that you understand what is 
my objection on this issue. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR 
MONTANA:   
Chair, 
when 
I 
went 
on 
leave 
in 
December 2014, Ms Ngoye acted in my position.  But in 
January, before I came back there, I think I was coming 
back late in the middle or late January 2015.  I was called 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 108 of 362 
 
to Cape Town by the Minister of Transport.  I was still on 
leave but they say:  Look, we have got an event, a big 
event here.  It was an ANC event, Chair.  But there is a 
problem with transport.  Can you help us to develop a 
transport plan so that we can move the masses of people 
around the Cape Metro and everything.   
 
I flew to Cape Town.  Sent two people to go and 
meet the Minister and later I joined to make sure that this 
big event is not – it runs smoothly.  It was an ANC event, 
Chair.  Now what happened is that during that time I met 
10 
with 
the 
chairman 
of 
the 
board. 
 
We 
then 
agreed 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that Mr Molefe? 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Molefe, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   In 2018 it was Mr Molefe.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   During that time, Chair, we had a lot of 
discussions. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
And 
the 
Minister 
that 
time 
was 
20 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Minister Dipuo Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   So I said:  No, let me talk to the chairman 
so that he know that I am – even though I am on leave, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 109 of 362 
 
that I have been called to assist in making sure there is a 
proper transport plan of the January an event of the ANC.  
So when I met with the chair – when I met with the 
Chairman of the board, Mr Molefe, he describes a number 
of issues.   
 
To my surprise and even shock, Mr Molefe then 
raised a number of issues and he said:  We will discuss 
them when you come back from leave.  One of them was 
about another contract and this contract was about – and it 
is not a literal contract, it is like this Prodigy issue where 
10 
PRASA employees would borrow money and the land that 
they will get – what is it called – authority ...[indistinct]  we 
gave you R 15 000,00 or fifty – R 100 000,00.   
 
PRASA agrees from its HR function to deduct the 
money and pay it over to us.  He raised a number of 
issues.  One of them was exactly that issue, Chair, and 
say:  Ja, there is – PRASA is supposed to pay and she(sic) 
used the word [speaking vernacular]  R 28 million.  Now I 
am on leave, Chair.  And he raised a number of other 
issues.  So I said:  No, no Chair.  No, no, no.  Please let 
20 
us hold it Chair.   
 
There is no much for me to say.  There is a 
legitimate company which renders – it provides services to 
our employees.  When an employee gets that money they 
sign that PRASA can deduct a certain amount and pass it 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 110 of 362 
 
over to that company.  PRASA deducted that money but did 
not pay to this company, Chair. 
 
And the chair was – so I corrected the chair 
there and then.  I said we will discuss it when I come back 
from leave but these are the facts.  He even joke and said:  
But you seem to know everything about this business.  I 
said:  No, no Chair.  But the people who provided, I was 
with you.  I am on leave.  And if everyone come and feed 
information like that and that company goes into dispute 
with us precisely because it is part like Prodigy, like the 
10 
issue about the Group Executive ...[indistinct] and this 
particular one, the Mashonisa(?), as it was called. 
 
They decide that, no, it is irregular, né?  They do 
not pay that company, Chair.  It is a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Who decided? 
MR MONTANA:   It is our Group Legal under ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Dingiswayo. 
MR MONTANA:   Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So what I am trying to say is Chair is that 
20 
they have identified ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...a number of contracts or entities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Now, this company is not known to me 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 111 of 362 
 
Chair.  It is providing a service.  Employees when they go 
and [speaking vernacular]  They do not come to the Group 
CEO and say we are going to go to that company.  I do not 
know this company.  But here are people who then give 
themselves.   
 
They are very in-checked with business which is 
Group ...[indistinct].  We are performing a payroll function 
as – on behalf of that company affected.  What is the 
benefit, okay?  Now part of why these companies play an 
important role, Chair.  If the employees as highly indebted, 
10 
it is a merger(?) assist you on how to manage your 
business and your employees.   
 
It also – when you deal with increases in 
salaries and everything and the way you structured the 
whole package to employees because it – making sure that 
the employees are not highly indebted.  A train driver who 
is highly indebted, when he gets – going to one accident 
scene and the train driver who clearly was involved in an 
accident will find that yet he is – what is called – this 
salary payslip there, okay?  You can see this driver was in 
20 
trouble.  So the point I am making ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I wanted to say let us stop the 
detour now.   
MR MONTANA:   Exactly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know you wanted to give a certain 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 112 of 362 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   So I can go through a number of things 
Chair, that all the entities that they are irregular are 
entities – when I went on leave they started to identify and 
they felt that they have got the authority, Chair, to say – 
and I will be ashamed, Chair, if I was Mr Dingiswayo, I will 
not say that and said until this are addressed I would not 
be drafting the agreement.   
 
This is a very arrogant statement by someone 
who does not have the authority.  And when I dismissed 
10 
Mr Dingiswayo, I said to him when I called him into the 
office.  I realised that when I asked this company’s 
complains or they bring issues to my attention and I asked 
business, they said Legal has stopped.  So you are part.   
 
And I used those words in an email – and I hope 
this email is here Chair.  I did not mix(?) my words 
because I realised that this was part of a concerted effort 
to undermine the business and undermine my leadership in 
the business.  And I would not accept that Chair.  This 
14.3, Chair, I thought that Dingiswayo would hide it and not 
20 
be as blatant of where I stand, Chair.  Now I think it is 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  He then says 
at paragraph 14.4: 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 113 of 362 
 
“O the 10 t h of April, Prodigy sent a further 
email, this time setting out what the thrust and 
purposes of the agreement were...” 
 
Was that an email that was sent to you? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then let us turn to page 14 – 
well, I mean, paragraph 14.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he does not attach the email, hey, 
Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, the difficulty with that 
10 
is, he did not have it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you see ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you will see ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Part of the – I have noticed, maybe it is 
three parts now.  You say, for example, when he says:  I 
raised questions in 14.3. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He does not tell us he raised questions 
with whom. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And now in 14.4 he said Prodigy sent a 
further email but he does not say who it was addressed to.  
He says it is set out, the thrust and purposes of the 
agreement but one would have thought that if he does not 
– one assumes that he has seen the email. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 114 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, the difficulty and as you 
will 
see, 
he 
says 
that 
the 
email 
showed 
that 
Ms Shunmugam knew what was going on in PRASA.  So it 
was obviously an important email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When I asked after the email, his 
answer to me was that he was on suspension at the time 
and he had no access to his email.  So that is why he 
could not produce it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:   Not – Chair, not being a ...[indistinct] not 
– I do not think Mr Dingiswayo was on suspension at that 
time, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no.  I am talking about at the 
Commission now.   
CHAIRPERSON:   At the time or ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At the time ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean when he gave evidence? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
When 
he 
gave 
evidence 
in 
the 
20 
Commission. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, one would have liked that if he did 
not attach the email, at least he says who it was addressed 
to and what it said.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 115 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then at 14.5 he says: 
“On the 18 t h of April, I was provided with a 
draft service level agreement that had been 
sent to me by Ms Nonhlanhla Kondiwe(sic). 
I set out my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Kondowe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, Kondowe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry. 
“I set out my concerns in an email which I sent 
to, among others, Ms Kondowe. 
I also sent this email to the then Group 
Procurement Officer, Mr Pongola...” 
 
Are you aware of that emails? 
MR MONTANA:   No, I was not aware Chair but I think if 
that was the approach that was the correct approach. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Then at 14.6 he says: 
“It 
appears 
that 
there 
was 
a 
general 
20 
acceptance that the contracts were invalid but 
their view was put forward that Prodigy was 
innocent and that PRASA should therefore 
proceed with the transaction...” 
 
Are you aware of that view, Mr Montana? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 116 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   The one in 14.5? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   14.6.  It is at the top of page 103. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes.  No, no Chair, I read that.  I do not 
know who was the general – and Chair that is where the 
problem comes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he also does not say who put forward 
that view.   
MR MONTANA:   And the paragraph, when it goes down, it 
says but Mr Montana contended that there was nothing 
wrong with the extension of...  So there is a general 
10 
agreement and so the general is the Chair.  And the CEO 
has 
got 
a 
different 
view. 
 
Even 
that 
paragraph 
is 
problematic.  Even all of these things, Chair, because 
there are people in meetings – you know these things are 
not dealt with by 18 000 employees.  There are very 
specific people involved in this.  Okay?   
 
Ms Ngoye would be one person.  The guy on 
training is – I cannot recall his name.  Mr Allen.  There is 
the Group Executive HR.  There are the Procurement 
people.  Before it even comes as recommended to.  Now 
20 
this general view, Chair, who does it represents?  And so I 
– what must I do as CEO?  Because there is a general 
view, I must agree to it?  You know...   
 
So, Chair, you can see that it is not specific.  It 
is making us actually to search for things that – I do not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 117 of 362 
 
think he is right, Chair.  Unless if he tells us that who 
specifically said it is invalid.  And that is the point I was 
making earlier on, that you have employees who decide 
that it is invalid.  It is invalid.   
 
And you see, Chair, I am interested in the 
annexure the end of that – because I think – I am hoping 
there is the email that I wrote to these chaps that I 
mastered into playing games with the business. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
MR MONTANA:    
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We will get to that in a moment.  Let 
me just deal with this issue that you raised.  Did you share 
the view that the contracts were invalid, you yourself? 
MR MONTANA:   No, I did not share the view, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  And that the reason it should 
be proceeded with is because Prodigy was in this.  You did 
not share that? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not know where that view – 
where this discretion ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay but now we know – we read 
20 
your criticism(?), Mr Montana.  Let us move on.  You have 
made your point that it is too vague.  I am just asking you 
about yourself, about your state of mind.  Then he says: 
“On the 18 t h of May, Mr Montana sent an email 
contending there was nothing wrong with the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 118 of 362 
 
extension of the contract and alleged that 
certain contracts were being targeted and a 
dirty campaign was being raged against him. 
A copy of this email is annexed as MMD-8...” 
 
And can ask you to turn to – I will tell you in a 
moment what page it is.  Page 187, Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:   187? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Have you got that? 
MR MONTANA:   I have got that, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the email you were asking – 
10 
you were hoping would be in the annexures.  Am I right/ 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Let us just look at this email.  
This is an email sent from you.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, that is my email Chair.  It confirms 
what I have just said earlier on. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Alright.  And it is dated the 
18 t h of May at 15:14 p.m. 
MR MONTANA:   But that is my email, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no.  I ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, Mr Montana, you must accept 
that I have heard everything you say.  I am asking a 
question so that the record will ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, Mr Soni.  It is under control.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 119 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   I am complaining ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He is responding correctly.  It is under 
control.   
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 The 
email 
is 
addressed 
to 
Ms Kondowe.  Is that right? 
MR MONTANA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
And 
Mr 
Dingiswayo 
and 
Mr Khuzwayo? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it is CC’d to a number of people.  
10 
And the subject matter...  Oh, sorry.  Including Ms Ngoye.  
The subject matter is:  My Station Programme, Prodigy.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now that is the contract we were 
talking about, the hundred and – I mean, the R 72 million 
contract.  Is that right? 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in the email you say: 
“Dear Nhlanhla.  There is nothing wrong with 
20 
the appointment of Prodigy, nor the extensions 
of their contract. 
I am not surprised because this is part of a 
much bigger agenda which is targeted at 
certain contracts and appointments and to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 120 of 362 
 
project these as being irregular. 
Some of the contracts have already been 
leaked to external auditors and the media as 
part of their strategy to discredit the Group 
CEO and create a cloud before he steps down 
at the end of the year...” 
 
Now this is a point you made much earlier this 
morning and a little while ago. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right.   
10 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then it goes on to say: 
“This 
is 
a 
well-coordinated 
strategy 
that 
started in November 2012 when I went on 
leave. 
I will at the most appropriate time act against 
all those who were involved in this dirty 
campaign. 
The investigation they are starting is unlawful 
and part of their plot I am well-aware of...” 
20 
 
That is also part of what you were saying. 
MR MONTANA:   That is me, Chair.  That is me speaking 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did that interest ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...trust my state of mind at that time. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 121 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And that investigation you are 
talking about there, which one is that? 
MR MONTANA:   The one that I reported about that were 
mandated(?) to the chair.  I realised that he told me about 
a number of things ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MONTANA:   ...in Cape Town. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   That a number of things, Mashonisa.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   So it is not only Prodigy.  It is not...  
There is a whole range of the - Chair, that they – when I 
went on leave, studies these things that popped up and are 
looked at, Chair.  And you will see my conclusion in that 
email Chair to say what I regard as the basis for these 
activities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is fine.  Continue, 
Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  The extent of 
– the letter continues – sorry, the email continues: 
20 
“The extent of opportunism by some of our 
managers really amazes me. 
A manager like Sidney Khuzwayo who starts 
first 
by 
cleaning 
the 
many 
irregular 
appointments he was party to with an SCM 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 122 of 362 
 
which I have been trying to address and even 
explaining some of these to the Office of the 
Public Protector. 
Some of the managers are excited by the new 
board and are feeding all sorts of wrong 
information so that they could carry favour 
with the board. 
They were the biggest losers at the end of the 
process...” 
 
And it goes on: 
10 
“The decision to partner with Prodigy on the 
Training Customer Services remains – and the 
extension of the contract is still in order. 
Please 
allow 
them 
to 
continue 
with 
their 
strategy which is bound to fail...” 
 
That is the text of your email.   
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe it would help that, as we proceed, 
we know who you identified as being behind this company 
you are talking about.  Maybe, as we proceed, that will 
20 
help to know who you are talking about or who were the 
people that you say were behind the campaign. 
MR MONTANA:   Well, the main driver, of course, was the 
chairman of the board.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 123 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Molefe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   And that is why I said that I corrected 
some of these things when I was in Cape Town and they 
became part of the major propaganda of this information 
being fed to the newspapers, some of the journalists were 
writing all these stories.  There was a big offensive, Chair, 
the issue that I had is that all these employees did not 
have 
the 
authority. 
 The 
authority 
resided 
with 
the 
executives, resides with the Group CEO and in some 
10 
instances with the board as to what we declare as irregular 
or not irregular and, Chair, in my affidavit I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Oh, 
okay, 
okay, 
Mr 
Montana, 
I 
understand.  I just want us to know the personalities that 
you regarded as behind the campaign.  So one, it was the 
Chairperson. 
MR MONTANA:   The Chair, it was Ms Ngoyi herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   It was Mr Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   And I think Mr Sydney Khuzwayo was 
there, was party to the campaign. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, those were the four people. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 124 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, the person who raised all these 
issues, by the way, on Prodigy, I cannot recall Allan’s 
surname but he was in our HR group in the department, 
Chair, and these were ones who wanted us to appoint some 
other people.  So they had their own preferred people, 
Chair, and if it did not go their way, they started this 
campaign.  They started feeding the board but more 
specifically Mr Molefe with this sort of information and they 
ran with this stuff and I was prepared to, Chair, to bring an 
end to that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say you cannot remember his 
surname but his name was Allan. 
MR MONTANA:   Alan.  I will remember the name as we 
continue, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Is it not Allan Ganghia. 
MR MONTANA:   Allan Ghanghia. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Allan? 
MR MONTANA:   Ganghia 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, he was responsible for training 
at PRASA and I think he used to sit on the board of the 
20 
Transport Training Authority, TETA, on the side of PRASA, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say he was also part of the 
campaign? 
MR MONTANA:   He was part of particularly – more 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 125 of 362 
 
specifically on issues related to Prodigy, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Prodigy, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you will see in my affidavit, I 
actually detailed some of the files because all of these 
people were lobbying me to get the support.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So I am aware of their battles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And when it comes to the Commission 
after either losing battle inside or they put themselves as 
10 
holier than thou and that is not true, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Then let us get back to the – 
we have dealt with your email, Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now this is – in fairness to him, Mr 
Dingiswayo’s comment on your email and it appears at the 
last line on paragraph 14.6 where he says: 
“For the record I dispute the allegations.” 
In other words, the allegations made in the email.  That is 
20 
what I understood him to say, he disputes. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay.  And I know that, Chair, except to 
say one thing, Chair, that – you see, when you use 
information selectively, you will see again, Chair, in my 
affidavit and my annexures, where Mr Dingiswayo says the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 126 of 362 
 
Group CEO, when he approved the Prodigy partnership was 
misled, he says that in 2015.  This thing happened in 2010.  
So five years he was not there, Chair, he cannot say he 
was misled. 
 
Now when you look at what he is saying and what 
he said in his email in 2015, it will be part of my annexure, 
there is just no correlation, Chair.  Okay?  And you can see 
he is very vocal.  What he is trying to drive at here, he is 
trying to get that there is a relationship between Prodigy, 
Montana and one Roy Moodley.   
10 
If you analyse the affidavit, and that is why I am 
dealing with it in detail in my affidavit, because it has got 
nothing to do with facts, it has to do with pursuing an 
agenda and that was the basis for targeting contracts. 
Strawberry is targeted, Chair.  Who signed the contract 
with Strawberry?  Not Lucky Montana, it is signed by 
Martha Ngoyi.   
She comes to the Commission and say Montana 
promoted Strawberry.  Because why?  It is linked – 
because they say it is linked to Moodley.  So it is narrative, 
20 
Chair, that we must break with solid facts and that is what I 
am going to do throughout my testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, that is fine.  I just want to 
say, Mr Soni, that I would have expected Mr Dingiswayo to 
have given his reasons for the view that the contracts were 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 127 of 362 
 
invalid or the Prodigy contract was invalid before getting to 
the point where we are. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But maybe he does that later. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He does not do that in so many 
words, he does that in regard to the SLA, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because, you see, there may be 
something to be said for what Mr Montana says in relation 
to paragraph 14.6 namely that he says here was the 
general view that everybody had mainly they accepted that 
10 
these contracts were invalid.  Here was an exception, Mr 
Montana, but one would have expected him to motivate to 
say it was invalid because of a, b, c, d so that when we 
come – so that we can then weigh Mr Montana’s different 
view against the reasons given. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, perhaps I can suggest 
why it is done that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Given what he says about the 
contract. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You asked earlier, Chairperson, 
whether there was a procurement policy and perhaps I 
should just ask Mr Montana the question now because that 
may… 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 128 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Reduce the sting of the question that 
you are posing to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, may I ask you, we have 
been through how the agreement came into being.  Was 
there 
procurement 
policy 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I have not heard the 
10 
question. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I say was there a procurement 
policies before first agreement was concluded between 
Prodigy and PRASA? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the answer is no. 
MR MONTANA:   No, the answer is no, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The nature of the partnership and the 
offer that we received, Chair, is not one that requires a – 
what is it called, a tender process or procurement process 
20 
in that way but what will happen, Chair, though is that even 
in instances like those and that is why Mr Dingiswayo 
speaks of the Chief Procurement Officer because even if 
something does not go out on tender, it still has to serve 
through the structures and the committees when it is 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 129 of 362 
 
recommended to me.  That is very important, Chair. 
But the nature of the programme, Chair, it is like 
somebody say did you go out on tender for the 2010 FIFA 
World Cup?  No, it is a FIFA event, it is not our event, we 
partner with them, Chair, it is not – we cannot go out on 
tender for that.  So there was none here, so the answer is 
no, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I do not want to us to confuse 
this and this is why might remember just before tea I asked 
you – I said to you the first contract is in October 2010, it 
10 
could not be related to FIFA.  So let us leave FIFA out of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but Mr Soni, I think he makes an 
example that appears to me to support the point he makes 
on the face of it.  He is saying there are certain 
circumstances where you do not go out on tender and he 
says – one such example, I do not – it may well be that on 
the merits of FIFA you might not be so – you might not be 
correct, Mr Montana, because prior to FIFA awarding the 
2010 World Cup to South Africa a lot of countries were 
competing to be awarded this, so maybe that might not be 
20 
such a good example but I think the point you are making 
is there are certain circumstances when PRASA or any 
government entity would not be required to go out on 
tender. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 130 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And rightly or wrong you believe that 
this one was one such a case. 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As I say, you made the example about 
FIFA, might not back up that point, but ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I have got no difficulty, I just did not 
want that… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because it seems to be a – I do not 
think Mr Montana intended or intends it that way. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just for record purposes I wanted – 
and because we are talking about 2010, I just wanted to 
draw that distinction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I accept both what you say and 
what Mr Montana says. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Mr Montana, within SCM 
processes in organs of state, and PRASA is an organ of 
20 
state, there is a mechanism to deal with what is called an 
unsolicited offer, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What that indication to enter into a 
partnership be what one would call an unsolicited offer? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 131 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I saw that – I saw that there 
was a – you remember unsolicited offers so be it are dealt 
with through a treasury rule.  I think treasury regulation.  
At that time it did not apply to this one, specifically, Chair.  
But there are instances where treasury rules, for example 
on unsolicited bids, would come into effect and what will 
happen, Chair, is that the Group Chief Procurement Officer 
of PRASA will then advise and say if you going on an 
unsolicited route the rules apply and this is how we should 
go about doing it. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So you, as you sit here, cannot say 
whether this was treated as unsolicited – when you were 
given advice that we should accept it, you do not know 
whether your legal section was saying you could do it 
because it is an unsolicited bid and it fits the requirement 
or whether it was being done on some treasury regulation. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I cannot say anything here, Chair, 
because I may have then to read the treasury regulations.  
If it was elevated at that time it was not elevated to me 
whether by the legal department that drafted the contract 
20 
at that time or by our Group HR but the nature of the 
programme, I do not think, Chair, that it required that, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe – well, let me ask this 
question.  You have a recollection whether the legal 
department at PRASA had an input before the contract was 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 132 of 362 
 
signed with Prodigy had an input because then that would 
have been the opportunity for them to raise issues if they 
thought there was something that was not right. 
MR MONTANA:   No, fair point, Chair, I think that when the 
matter came I referred it to two people, Tiro Holele and Mr 
Mpepa Ramoodwa(?).  I did not specifically identify legal 
and that may have been that oversight, Chair, but when the 
contract was put together, it was the legal department that 
did all the work, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So the legal department got 
10 
involved at the stage of putting together the agreement. 
MR MONTANA:   They put together the partnership 
agreement, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The partnership agreement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the 2010 agreement. 
MR MONTANA:   That is the one, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, Chairperson, this set of 
questions was in relation to your question about the 
general acceptance and the reason I say that is generally 
when it is an internal …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Structure. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Process. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If there was an internal process that 
was flawed then the contractor is regarded as innocent. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 133 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that is the only point I want to 
make. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Which I suspect is what – I am not 
saying it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But it would justify that notion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, that is fine, I just want – I 
am just – I might not have seen this before, I might not 
10 
have picked it up, I am just saying that to the extent that 
Mr Dingiswayo may - in his affidavit may be criticising that 
the PRASA Prodigy agreement was invalid and should not 
have been entered into, he should not just make a 
statement it was invalid, he must tell us why was it invalid 
and if, in his affidavit, he does not actually do that, that is 
a defect in what he is telling us. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And – ja because, as I say, there may be 
merit in what Mr Montana was saying about paragraph 14.6 
20 
that the picture given is everybody accepts this is invalid, 
this is just a one out, is an exception.  He sees it 
differently.  But then you – if you do not tell us why is it 
invalid, number one, who was saying it was invalid because 
he just says there was a view that was put forward.  No, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 134 of 362 
 
no, he says there was a general acceptance that the 
contracts were invalid and then he says there was a view 
that Prodigy was innocent and so on.   
 
So it may well be that Mr Dingiswayo needs to be 
asked to say why is he saying that but I think we can – oh, 
we are at one already. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, can I add one small thing?   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   We must also ask who is the authority in 
terms of the SCM policy when, for example, there are any 
10 
deviations and everything because the policy will clarify 
who is responsible for that because that is also very 
important about where does it take his concerns to. 
 
But my point, a general one, Chair, it is very clear 
that this was no happening in isolation it was a number of 
a number of contracts that had been identified that were 
presented as being “irregular” and I would not accept that 
as CEO, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is alright.  Okay, let us 
take the lunch adjournment, it is about three minutes, four 
20 
minutes to one, we will resume at five minutes past two. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 135 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Mr 
Montana, we had just finished paragraph 14.6.  We now go 
to paragraph 14.7 which is ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  What page is that again? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry, page 103.  
MR MONTANA:  103? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Remember looking on the left hand 
side, the numbers in black. 
MR MONTANA:  Okay.  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At paragraph 14.7 Mr Dingiswayo 
says: 
“At about 19H00 on the 19 t h of May, Mr 
Montana’s PA phoned me to say Mr Montana 
wished to see me urgently.” 
 
Can you recall that happening? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “I asked if it could wait until the 
following day.  She phoned back to say he 
wished to see me personally that evening.” 
20 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She says she spoke to Ms Ngoye in 
the meantime and he says at paragraph 14.8: 
 
“I arrived at Mr Montana’s office and sat to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 136 of 362 
 
meet with him.” 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “He thanked me for coming back to 
work from home and made light of this by 
chuckling.” 
MR MONTANA:  I do not know that part but we met that 
evening Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “He then indicated that he had been 
told that I was one of the people who were 
10 
working against the interest of PRASA on a 
number of matters and that I was abusing my 
position as one of the legal advisors of 
PRASA.” 
 
Now that is the point you made earlier.  
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But did you tell him that, that 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  No, no I told him directly Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “He cited as an example that I had 
20 
told PRASA employees to cancel some tender.” 
 
Did you tell him that?   
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I mentioned numerous tenders 
but they were not tenders, the contracts that were enforced 
that will be either stopped or terminated because of his 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 137 of 362 
 
own actions Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the issue you raise that he 
started from around November the previous year.  
MR MONTANA:  When I went on leave Chair, in December 
2014.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  “I indicated to him in my position that 
I had no powers to tell people to cancel 
tenders and that I had not given any such 
advice.” 
 
Now obviously on your version that could not have 
10 
happened because you did not allege that he had cancelled 
anything, or did you tell him that? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I did not speak about a specific 
tender.  You recall earlier on I mentioned a series of a 
number of these tenders that were, or not tenders, but 
contracts.  Existing contracts that were either being 
stopped or investigated and that is what I discussed with 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I think let us put it this way.  Here 
he suggests that you made, you sighted as an example that 
20 
he had told PRASA employees to cancel some tender.  
Would that sentence be correct if we change tender to 
tenders? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair.  These are existing, these 
were existing contracts.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 138 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Contracts, ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Not new tenders ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  If he said contracts there 
would that sentence be correct then? 
MR MONTANA:  Ja Chair, I told him about the number of, I 
mentioned the number of contracts.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Because he says you said as an example 
that he had told PRASA employees to cancel some tender.  
You are saying one, you did not talk about a tender.  You 
talked about not one contract but a number of contracts.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Existing contracts.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Existing contracts and your version is 
that you raised the issue that in respect of a number of 
existing contracts, he had said they should be cancelled.  
Is that your version?  What you have said to him on that 
occasion? 
MR MONTANA:  Exactly Chair, the issue about and that is 
the point we were discussing before lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  The issue about there is a general feeling. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  General acceptance.  
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
And 
you 
asked 
Chair, 
correctly 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Who is the general. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 139 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Precisely, because that was the issue 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And I said he firstly did not have the 
authority to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  But also you were applying it in a very 
selective way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  You see Chair, let me provide one factual 
issue here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  What had happened at that time, and this 
other than the, what I mentioned about the Cape Town 
meeting with the Chair.  Subsequent to that there was an 
email which I do not have but I think some of the 
information presented here is very selective Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Comes complete. 
MR MONTANA:  Mr Lindikaya who was the company 
20 
secretary at that time, then sent a list of contracts, of 
existing contracts to Mr Joseph Hongulo, who was the chief 
procurement officer at the time and these were contracts 
that they wanted to investigate.  
 
That 
list 
of 
course 
that 
email 
came 
to 
my 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 140 of 362 
 
possession and was consistent with what we discussed 
with the Chair in Cape Town.  So that is when I decided 
that I will act.  So this thing about some contracts being 
invalid or void, is not an isolated thing.  
 
It was part of a thing that certain contracts, not 
contract and Chair I give by the way in my affidavit 
examples of for example contracts almost similar to 
Prodigy, but they will not even be investigated or looked at.  
So they selected because what they were looking for, again 
I deal with it in my affidavit.  
10 
 
They thought that there are some powerful forces 
relating behind these tenders and they found that that is 
not true.  It is ordinary people who were doing work, and 
they just went on to destroy their lives.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So would it be correct to say you did 
accuse him on that occasion of telling PRASA employees 
to cancel certain existing contracts? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair, they either ... the biggest thing 
that was happening Chair, they would then block payments 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  And say it is under investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the finance department.  
MR MONTANA:  And all of those things, indeed Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Alright.  I hope that helps Mr 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 141 of 362 
 
Soni to clarify. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, it certainly does.  
MR MONTANA:  And Chair, it is consistent with the letter, 
with rather the email that the counsel read earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Their own email to all the three people to 
say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  About the campaign. 
MR MONTANA:  About the campaign that was happening 
Chair.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:  And this is what destroyed PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana, you said that there was 
an email that Mr Lindikaya had sent which had a list of 
contracts.  Do you have that email? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I do not have Chair, but at that 
time I did have.  I could no longer access, after I had left I 
could no longer access my email Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you this, on that ... I mean 
20 
there must be contracts that were on that, were listed in 
that email that you will remember.  Was Prodigy one of 
those contracts? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I think Prodigy was one of them, ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You think or was it? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 142 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  No, no it was.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Swifambo? 
MR MONTANA:  No, Swifambo ... Swifambo was on that list 
chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Siyangena? 
MR MONTANA:  Siyangena was on that list.  Mashonisa 
was also on that list. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, there was one called Mashonisa? 
MR MONTANA:  Well, the name Chair is still running away 
from me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  But in the course of our investigation, I 
put it on record Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Any other that you can remember? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, there was one dealing with the 
introduction of a security system on the central line in the 
Cape.  I think that was done by one Israeli company, which 
was putting new technology to protect the network there.  
So we did a test on that.  
20 
 
I think there was the issue of a company called 
Sofinity if I remember well.  There was quite a couple of 
companies Chair that were on the list of that email, where 
these companies, they needed information to look at.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And Royal Security? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 143 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  Royal Chair, was not there.  Royal was not 
there.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Strawberry Works? 
MR MONTANA:  Strawberry Works was there Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So just to make clear what your concern 
was with regard to what you say Mr Dingiswayo was doing, 
what he and others were doing.  with regard to Mr 
Dingiswayo your objection was that on your understanding, 
he was making decisions that he had no authority to make 
in the company in terms of instructing people to cancel 
10 
contracts, or is the position that on your understanding, he 
was giving advice as opposed to giving instruction to 
certain people in the company to cancel contracts in 
circumstances where that advice should go through certain 
channels and it was not going through certain channels.   
 
I just want you to identify what it is that you found 
unacceptable in terms of what he was doing? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I have already formed the view at 
that time, a firm view that here is a Chair who is not 
working with the interest of the company, who is pursuing a 
20 
particular agenda, and for example finance will say we are 
not ... when a company writes to me and say we are not 
being paid or there is this problem, then finance will say 
but 
this 
contract 
has 
been 
flagged 
by 
legal 
for 
investigation.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 144 of 362 
 
 
I 
said 
but 
what 
is 
this 
investigation. 
 
Who 
authorised such an investigation?  So Chair, so that view I 
formed and when I called him to say I think your time is up 
here, that was the matter.  The other issue was the fact 
about when he says I will not draft the agreement, there 
was the issue about his ex-boss who had left and refused 
to represent the interest of the company.  
 
All of those combined had given me a clear view 
that you are working with other people to undermine 
PRASA.  To create this thing of this massive, what is it 
10 
called?  The grant corruption in this company.  When there 
is none, and Chair that is why I said earlier on that his 
right 
to 
identify 
shortcomings, 
witnesses 
or 
even 
irregularity, Chair it is proper. 
 
That when you do that and you select, you target 
the company that is owned by Zondo and you jump the one 
that is owned by Montana with the same thing, the same 
company.  Chair, in my ... for example in my submission on 
this specific issue, I list the companies that were in the 
same position as Prodigy. 
20 
 
Mr Dingiswayo jumped that, and even Fast Forward, 
at the time when I had left, between that time I had left and 
his testimony to this commission, there were a lot of 
companies Chair, that Mr Dingiswayo did not even raise a 
hand and say Werksmans was appointed irregularly. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 145 of 362 
 
 
Why?  Because it ... Chair, it is the same WhatsApp 
group.  They are tied Chair.  Those are the words he used.  
Let me give you another one.  There is a company called 
Forefront, okay which Mr Molefe and his board handpicked 
for the work that they needed to do in terms of media and 
all of those things.   
 
These were raised not by me, they were raised even 
by National Treasury as it were.  Mr Dingiswayo, between 
the time I left, if indeed he was this champion to fight 
against irregularity, or any form of corruption, why then did 
10 
he jump those.  
 
Why do you select, and that is the point that I am 
making and I realised that he is not working for this 
company.  He is working for certain people in the company, 
and I said to him that look, the usual route is a disciplinary 
route.  
 
But for someone like you, you and Mata in fact you 
have made it very clear, you have ... what is the word?  
You have confirmed where you stand on these issues and I 
said you cannot work for me.  You cannot do that.  How do 
20 
I sit with that? 
 
Remember Chair, even though Fanie reported to 
Martha, the appointment and dismissal of GM’s was the 
CEO’s responsibility.  So I took that decision.  In that 
meeting I decided to fire him and after I have explained to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 146 of 362 
 
him I said you are not going to explain anything.  You, I 
think you are not working in the best interest of the 
company and I formed a firm view around that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me try and summarise what you are 
saying, as I understand it for you to say if that is a fair 
summary or not.  You are saying prior to this meeting that 
you had with Mr Dingiswayo, you had come to the view that 
there was a campaign that was being waged by certain 
people against you, and you have named them.  
 
I think they were five when you added, and Mr 
10 
Dingiswayo was one of them.  
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And when you called him to this meeting 
this particular evening, you had a discussion with him and 
you decided to fire him and you told him so.  
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The reason why you fired him, is that you 
had concluded that he was working against the interest of 
PRASA.  
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say that was evidenced by his 
participation in this campaign. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say that he was in this campaign 
was also the conclusion that he was part of this campaign 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 147 of 362 
 
was also shown by the fact that he or they were selective 
in terms of the contracts which they said should be 
cancelled or should be investigated.  
 
There were other contracts which may have had 
similar problems which they were not investigating.  That is 
why you dismissed him. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, let me add there.  I think you have 
summarised it correctly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  I need to say Chair, that one of the things 
10 
is that he has not given me the opportunity as the person 
who should make the decision on this matter.  I have never 
received a single memo or message from Mr Dingiswayo 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Saying that, that is why my email that I 
sent, 
before 
I 
fired 
[indistinct] 
there 
was 
an 
email 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that email. 
MR MONTANA:  There was the conversations that were 
20 
taking place, and I did tell the Chair of the board Mr 
Molefe, these people that are briefing you and providing 
with information, they are going to mislead you and today 
we are paying the price Chair with PRASA that has 
collapsed.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 148 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Thank you.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases.  Mr Montana, let me ask 
you this because the impression that I get reading Mr 
Dingiswayo’s 
affidavit, 
is 
the 
reason 
you 
called 
Mr 
Dingiswayo on the 19 t h at seven in the evening is to inform 
him that you had decided to dismiss him. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So you had made up your mind before 
the meeting and the purpose of the meeting was to 
communicate ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:  No, I have made up my mind Chair.  I 
made up my mind, that is correct.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the purpose of the meeting was 
to tell him that you are dismissed.  
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you said something about, you said 
the normal process would be a disciplinary inquiry. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And you said to him but for people like 
you, as I recall your evidence, in effect it is not even 
20 
necessary to go that route.  You are fired.  Is my 
understanding correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, I had taken a decision that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 149 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  Fanie should go. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
I 
have 
made 
that 
decision, 
and 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  And yes, the normal process if it was a 
border line issue ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  Or factor to be established, but I was 
convinced that here is a group of people working inside the 
10 
company, who were actually not even prepared to even 
follow the direction that we have agreed upon, because 
what 
PRASA 
was 
implementing, 
were 
not 
Montana’s 
decisions.  
 
They 
were 
decisions 
that 
were 
made 
by 
our 
executive committee and they were decisions made by 
EXCO.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana, let me ask you.  When 
had you firmly decided that you are going to fire Mr 
20 
Dingiswayo? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, if you read that email you can 
see that, you remember Mr Soni I ... when you read that 
email I emphasised that it gives exactly my state of mind.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Your state of mind. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 150 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  My state of mind ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your thinking at the time.  
MR MONTANA:  It captured, I cannot deny that Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the reason I ask is you do not say 
that in that email.  I gather that that was on your mind 
when you wrote that email because you recall I asked you, 
do you confirm that the email was sent at 15H14 PM.  You 
remember?   
 
This is on the 18 t h. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And now we are looking at 27 hours 
later, 
when 
you 
meet 
Mr 
Dingiswayo, 
say 
you 
are 
dismissed.  The question I want to ask you is at the time 
you wrote the email, had you decided that you were going 
to dismiss ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, I have made up my mind.  I think 
that you can see that one of the sentences that I put there 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  It is very clear.  My mind was very clear 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MONTANA:  That there are certain people that it is 
either I go or they go.  But we are no longer going to find 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 151 of 362 
 
any common ground, and that was the case Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So at the time you wrote this email on 
the 18 t h you had already made up your mind? 
MR MONTANA:  I have made up my mind Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let me ask you the question.  Did 
the disciplinary procedures of PRASA allow you to make 
that kind of decision before there could be a disciplinary 
hearing and the affected employee could be heard? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair, the disciplinary code and I think 
that together with the, with parts of the Labour Relations 
10 
Act ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Labour Relations Act, ja.  
MR MONTANA:  I think that it is generally the principle that 
he must subject to someone give him a hearing, subject 
him to the disciplinary hearing.  That is overall principle, 
but I do not think it exclude in some instances the issue of 
summarily dismissing someone when you think a lot is at 
stake.  
 
I think that when you drive a wedge between board 
and management, it is a serious issue Chair and it is 
20 
something that in my view, and it is a choice that you make 
as a CEO because ultimately we are CEO’s because we 
have to evaluate all the evidence and make a decision.  
 
My decision was that the relationship between, and 
we saw how you asked the question, I think it was you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 152 of 362 
 
counsel who asked the question.  The, why the relationship 
between myself and Mr Molefe even deteriorated Chair, 
other than the process of his appointment.  
 
There was a lot of these things happening.  When 
Mr Molefe asked me those issues about, raised those 
issues in Cape Town, it was quite clear Chair that there 
was a lot at play.  That I go on leave, people feed the 
Chairman with all of those things.  
 
He did not get them from me.  He got them from 
someone else.  Someone else, and I knew Chair when I 
10 
came out of that, that I am going to deal with it firmly and 
decisively.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Mr 
Montana, I do not want us to debate.  I am just going to 
present this and you must comment.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, and I wanted to say of course we 
accept that we are not CCMA.  We are not the Labour 
Court.  We are not here to assess the fairness or otherwise 
of the dismissal.  
20 
MR MONTANA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I just wanted to get that information. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  There are two rules of natural justice.  
The one rule is hear the other side, audi alterum partum, 
and the other rule is you should not be a judge in your own 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 153 of 362 
 
Court, [indistinct].  Now I am not trying to sound clever, but 
in this case you broke the rules.  
 
You did not give him a hearing and you yourself 
took the decision.   
MR MONTANA:  Chair, look I think ... Chair, look we had 
processes at that time.  I think that in most instances it is 
assumed that when we say we give you a chance we mean 
a disciplinary case.  A consultation is part of that process 
Chair, and I think that that is what would have happened.  
 
Secondly Chair, these matters are not about me.  
10 
Maybe we are relating it to you, but they are about PRASA.  
That 
is 
about, 
if 
you 
come 
in 
and 
blow 
up 
the 
implementation of contracts, it is about PRASA, it is not 
about me.  
 
I may be the CEO and the board asked me about 
the performance.  I have got to act against that.  So we did 
of course Chair deal with that issue.  There was a meeting 
between myself and the Chair, because a day after the 
same thing happened with Martha Ngoye.   
 
I think we will deal with it at a later stage.  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  But the same process, because Martha 
then came to fight about the issue and I said here is the 
issue and you are part of it, and  but at the next board 
meeting, I think they went and raised it with the Chairman 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 154 of 362 
 
of the board.  
 
We had a board meeting.  I think that the board 
meeting was delayed for about two to three hours, because 
myself and Mr Molefe were fighting over these matters, and 
in the interest of progress we then agreed that no, let them 
be reinstated.  
 
I then said to him it is fine, I am going to reinstate 
them but I am going to charge them in that case, which is 
what happened.  So I called them back, I withdrew their 
dismissal and then I immediately gave them the letter, 
10 
suspending them pending a disciplinary case.  
 
So we had discussions about that, but these 
matters were not personal matters as far as I was 
concerned. 
 
They 
were 
about 
PRASA. 
 
Someone 
sabotaging PRASA’s decisions and programs.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you at the time you wrote 
the email of the 18 t h of May, the one we have talked about, 
you said you had decided that Mr Dingiswayo must go.  
You had already made up your mind.  
MR MONTANA:  I have already made up my mind Chair.  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And was that the same with regard to 
Martha? 
MR MONTANA:  Martha Ngoye. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So we know now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Soni.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 155 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  You may proceed.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So we know now in relation to both of 
them at least you had decided on the 18 t h that they would 
go.   
MR MONTANA:  The 18 t h is the day I wrote my email. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
MR MONTANA:  Yes, no I had already formed that opinion 
Chair, that they have to go.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Was that the same with Mr Khuswayo 
10 
and Mr Denge as well? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes, and many others Chair, and many 
others.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:  Many others Chair, so yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now we do not then need to read too 
much more of this part of Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit.  He 
says that there was a debate, well I mean a conversation 
at 14.11.  He says: 
 
“Mr Montana went on to say the only thing we 
20 
could discuss was how much I would accept 
for my contract to be terminated.” 
 
Did you tell him that? 
MR MONTANA:  Well, I cannot remember that Chair, but it 
is possible that I have, because I wanted to be fair as well, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 156 of 362 
 
but I made it very clear.  We cannot work together.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, and he says he had said that if 
you are going to terminate my contract, I am not going to 
be a party to an unlawful termination.  Did he tell you that? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair, he signed ... it sounds like 
someone I know.  They represent themselves as brave.  
No, that was ... he was unhappy Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He was? 
MR MONTANA:  He was unhappy. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
10 
MR MONTANA:  He looked unhappy, but those words were 
not uttered as far as I remember Chair, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then he says you told him that he 
could wait for his letter of termination or indicate where he 
would like it to be delivered did you tell him that. 
MR MONTANA:   I think, Chair if I recall well, I am not sure 
if his letter of dismissal was ready.  I assumed that he - 
because the letter would have been drafted by the legal 
department, not by me and then - so the actual meeting 
took place he got a letter, but I cannot recall exactly now 
20 
Chair that was in that very evening, or it was the it was the 
next day, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess if he says he got it the following 
day you would not take one take issue with that.  
MR MONTANA:   No, no I will not take issue with that, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 157 of 362 
 
Chair no.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say it was prepared by the legal 
department would ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Yes I think it was the legal department or 
the HR, our Group HR.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay, well, I am ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   On my instruction Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, I accept that.  I am wondering 
whether seeing that you were dismissing him and him being 
in the legal department. And you intended as I understand 
10 
it, Ms Magoyi as well was the head of that department. I 
am wondering whether you would have asked the same 
department to prepare his letter. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair, but the drafting of the letter, I 
think, yes I think it should have been the legal department, 
if I am wrong then it would have been our ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The HR. 
MR MONTANA:   Our HR team that ...[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  But I invited them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And I think I did explain the reasons, and 
say craft it for me, and then I signed the letter there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before you had decided to terminate 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 158 of 362 
 
their services or after?  In other words, when you ask them 
to craft the letter was the crafting merely to say, I have 
made up my mind, just put it down in writing, to comply 
with whatever.  Was that your state of mind? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair I decided on these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well as I understand the position Mr 
Soni I think at the time that he wrote that email, he had 
made up his mind.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   These were the people who were on this 
10 
campaign. And he would get rid of those in regard to whom 
he had the power to get rid of them, and the rest that was 
happening load from there and I assume that your question 
may 
therefore 
be 
making 
the 
request 
or 
giving 
an 
instruction to the legal department or HR to prepare the 
letter, whether it would have been ahead of meeting Mr 
Dingiswayo that evening and telling him or after. 
MR MONTANA:   No Chair I think it would have been after 
my meeting with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After your meeting. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  Because I think - I cannot recall. But 
something I think happened Chair and that is why I called 
him to say, because I asked for him, he was not in the 
office. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 159 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   I was told he left.  I said no I want him to 
call me. And that's what we do of course with senior 
managers, sometimes you call them and I learned from the 
best Chair, when he said Mr Ollerman must come back 
even if he is gone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I ask you and I just want to be clear 
about this before you had made up your mind you had not 
talked 
to 
legal 
or 
human 
resource 
to 
dismiss 
Mr 
Dingiswayo, Ms Magoyi and the others. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the - I think, if I recall well, because 
I used to have what also what to call a one on one 
meeting, and more specifically with the HR executive. I did 
mention 
because 
the 
situation 
in 
the 
business 
was 
deteriorating, there was a lot of tension. There was a lot of 
in-fighting, even our own executive meetings were split in 
between in the middle. And so - so I think, and I knew what 
would 
be 
the 
advisor 
to 
come 
to, 
and 
I 
think 
he 
summarised it so well, that suspend these guys, go through 
a process, but I believe the job of a CEO is to evaluate, is 
20 
it in the best interest of the company with the disciplinary 
case versus a further point of mobilisation for all these 
forces that were there?  
And Chair you know when I met with the Chair of 
the Board we would discuss this matter two hours before, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 160 of 362 
 
and we had two three hours delay in the board meeting. I 
kept on asking the Chair, I shared the principle that we're 
making, but have you become a shop steward for some of 
these people in the business, so - so if you if you, if you 
look, if you look into where PRASA was Chair, I think that 
it was not normal, it was not the normal environment. And, 
and that it's unfortunate if you asked me if it was a 
different environment, but I have sat with executives Chair 
where I have asked some of them to leave and the way I do 
it, I sit with them and say, look, we are going this way, and 
10 
I think you're going that way. I'll give you an example with 
one of the ICT executives, I would sit with her all the time 
and say look we have employed as an executive, not as an 
ICT specialist. So we have put you in a leadership position. 
And you are not operating at that level, you keep on 
dropping. And so you can coach you can consult with 
people say, I want you to operate at that level for us, for us 
to achieve our goals. These are not junior employees 
Chair, these are people that are highly paid, and they 
should operate at that particular level. And we need to be 
20 
very careful that whilst the principle is important. I think 
the principle outlined in the law is - must be respected at 
all the times, but I think there is instances where when 
people don't – you know if Mr Dingiswayo’s meeting states 
or was taking decisions that I do not like, his agenda, I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 161 of 362 
 
would understand.  I am saying he was actively part of the 
process to undermine the company Chair, and why should 
he get the benefit of a good policy of PRASA about his 
disciplinary process?  I don't believe in that. I believe that 
you must you must wake up these particular issues.  
So I respect Chair what Mr Soni is saying, I don't 
dispute with that, but I think I am trying to convey as 
honestly as possible that I've taken a decision that these 
guys must - is there all the way. And maybe even the kind 
of thing that was happening with the chairman of the board 
10 
would even perhaps even change.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I - and this is my last question on 
this.  You did consult the head of HR, they advised you 
against the ...[indistinct], you weighed the situation, you 
examined your duties as the CEO, and you decided that 
you were going to go through with the decision, with your 
decision, would that be a correct summation?  
MR MONTANA:   That is a correct summation Chair, I 
agree with that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And he says at 14.12 on page 105: 
20 
“This meeting was very short. I had driven for 30 
minutes one way for meeting of about five minutes.” 
That must be correct, I mean, and I - it's not in - I am  just 
saying putting the hard facts down. That must be correct? 
MR MONTANA:  I don't think it took five minutes. But I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 162 of 362 
 
think the value of it was in our discussion, not on the - 
more than the – if I were to take the 30 minutes into 
account Chair it means I have to build a compound inside 
PRASA for these executives to sleep there, so that I know 
when I want to consult with them, they're immediately 
available.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no. 
MR MONTANA:   That's more or less the principle. I think 
there's Mr Dingiswayo is correct, it didn’t take long. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How long did the meeting last? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Well 10/15 minutes Chair I think ja, more 
or less ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright then he deals with Ms Ngoyi 
and we'll deal with that when we deal with what he says 
about her because this is now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am sorry Mr Soni, something – I 
have just remembered something.  You said you were 
looking for Mr Dingiswayo and you were told that he had 
left, and then you said he must call you. That raises the 
question. 
Why 
couldn't 
you 
wait 
until 
the 
following 
20 
morning? Is this something that had happened that was 
quite urgent for you to call him all the way back? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think he - I don't think there was 
something that - I think I had taken the decision that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was the line ...[intervenes]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 163 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   That was his last day that I was going to 
execute that task that very day, and I think I was probably 
in many meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And by the time I was looking for him, he 
had left for home and that is why I called Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson.  Let’s 
leave 14.13 and 14.14 out, because as I say they deal with 
Ms Ngoyi who we will deal with her tomorrow, or later this 
10 
afternoon.  At 14.15 he says: 
“Mr Montana's reaction, and he gives three possible 
explanations. One is you will temporarily irrational, 
you were overly invested in showing that your word 
was final, or you were overly invested in the 
transaction, and was intolerant of anyone who saw 
the 
screaming 
irregularities 
in 
the 
Transnet 
...[indistinct].” 
Now I just - the only reason and we don’t need to accept 
the correctness of what he is saying, but what is quite 
20 
clear if you look at the email of the 18 t h, that your email 
was in reaction to the project ...[indistinct]. That is 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So in other words when he says there 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 164 of 362 
 
is a possibility that you were invested in this transaction is 
not something we can exclude, we would have to put it on 
to the equation because we know now at the time you 
wrote your email that you were writing it in connection with 
questions that had been raised about Prodigy. I accept the 
general background you're given, but I am nevertheless 
saying that the chairperson when assessing if there is a 
link we have to take that into account, would that be 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair no, I think the let us be guided 
10 
by evidence. Mr Dingiswayo wrote and said people were – 
people at the - and I said ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   General acceptance? 
MR MONTANA:  No, not the general acceptance, but in 
another one way he said when the CEO approved this thing 
some people misled the CEO, and so you can see Chair 
that there's a lot of tense and twists in all of these things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was in relation to the Prodigy 
matter? 
MR MONTANA:  The Prodigy matter Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  Where he said, when he wrote in an email 
now, if we take it to its logical conclusion, and talk about 
Investec, 
so 
it 
meant 
therefore 
that 
some 
of 
the 
paragraphs that he - that we dealt with, they now get a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 165 of 362 
 
different meaning. We'll have to go back and you'll see it 
will actually mean that here's a man who is accusing his - 
the good CEO of something untoward. Okay, and it is dealt 
with so.  
So Mr. Soni if we take it to its logical conclusion, 
we have – I assume that the Commission will be will be 
driven by evidence, will check for example, why Prodigy, 
why not 600 Companies and they're in my affidavit Chair, 
there are many other companies that were left, and why 
he's been silent on many others, and I am saying there's 
10 
only one explanation is because it has to do with the list of 
companies that they've identified, not through structures of 
the company, not through the board of each member, but 
on the on the site and then try to try to give him, try to 
implement.  Chair I think my responding affidavit to point 3 
on Mr Dingiswayo actually, I am putting it actually in a very 
– in a light-hearted way.  Actually I am putting it very 
strongly 
in 
the 
written 
word 
Chair, 
So 
yes, 
if 
the 
Commission evaluate, and I presented evidence to the 
Commission, and it takes that, of course Chair it means 
20 
that I've got the right to go to court and say but I've given 
the Commission this evidence, and on what basis did the 
Chair of the Commission ignore this evidence, and exercise 
my right in that respect, and the same apply Chair to what, 
on Friday we discussed in respect to the contracts, you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 166 of 362 
 
remember saying that you've got judgments where, for 
example there's scathing statements about me by the 
courts, but I was also denied the right to - to put my view. 
So - so that if the Commission - the Commission will have 
to take that into account, it is the same principle.  
But I, I respect that I don't think for the record 
Chair I was invested in any of these companies, and in 
fact, 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
I 
was 
one 
of 
the 
most 
investigated people Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, the most? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Investigated in essence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:  And you'll see Chair this will become clear 
when we discuss particularly the - the Ollermans report 
that – that – that - that was here, and they still cannot find 
Chair, whether law enforcement agencies or whether 
investigations appointed the PRASA, they are struggling to 
find – I can point all day it was an irregularity, there Mr 
Montana made a mistake, but they cannot accuse me of 
any form of improper conduct or corruption Chair, it cannot 
20 
be. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:  Now Mr Montana Mr Dingiswayo 
doesn't say, you know, as part of the investigating team 
and 
the 
legal 
team 
of 
PRASA 
– 
or 
sorry, 
of 
the 
Commission, investigating PRASA, we would have to take 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 167 of 362 
 
into account all relevant facts. Can I show this to you?  
If you look at page 138, you don't need to go to the 
that's the letter from Ms Shunmugum to you inviting the 
partnership between PRASA and Prodigy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 138? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   138 Chair. 
MR MONTANA:  The one that I wrote on? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, indeed, and you immediately on 
the same day said the proposal must be accepted. 
MR MONTANA: Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That's the 10th of June 2010 is that 
right? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now independently of this the 
Commission has evidence that Royal Security, who is a 
company owned by Mr Roy Moodley and we've been 
through that already, had between July 2007 and June 
2009 paid an amount of R64 000 monthly to Mr Zuma as an 
employee of Royal Security. Are you aware of that? 
MR MONTANA:  No, not at all. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, I am saying to you, we have 
the bank statements to established that, and one of the 
questions I want to ask you just arising from investment in 
this, and of course the allegations being made that you 
favoured Moodley. This contract that is now the subject 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 168 of 362 
 
matter of the court application and that has caused the 
dismissal of few people in legal, namely Mr Dingiswayo, Ms 
Ngoyi comes a year after Mr Zuma becomes president, and 
Mr Moodley has stopped him giving him R64 000.   Is - I 
am asking you to comment because there must be room to 
say there could be a link. 
MR MONTANA:  So I don't know about the relationship 
between former President Zuma and Mr. Moodley. You 
know, again, I deal with it in my affidavit, this specific 
issue of Royal Security.  Royal was not appointed by us, by 
10 
us 
I 
mean, 
when 
I 
became 
CEO 
and 
the 
board, 
...[indistinct].  In fact there was an investigation done by I 
think it was Deloittes, to look at the security companies 
that were involved in with PRASA, and it found that the 
majority of those companies were in fact appointed in the 
1990s 
before 
that 
was 
even 
passed. 
So 
and 
more 
specifically Royal Security. It was involved in railways in 
1991.  
Now Chair, and how does it come to PRASA?   It is 
because when Metrorail Shosholoza Mail were transferred 
20 
in terms of Section 197 we had to take all the employees 
and we had to take all their contracts, all the Metrorail 
contractors, that is how – so we did not appoint Royal 
Security. 
It 
has 
already 
been 
there. And 
then 
who 
recommended 
for 
these 
security 
companies 
to 
be 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 169 of 362 
 
extended? 
Our 
friend 
...[indistinct] 
and 
people 
like 
...[indistinct] in the PETA adjudication committee. Now 
because there's a fight Chair, because there's a fight 
between myself and the Chairman of the board, they are on 
the other side. What do they do?  Then they tell the Chair 
this is Montana's corruption.  They don't tell the Chair that 
we recommended this at this particular stage. 
So I think there is no leg - even when I consulted 
the legal and the investigating teams of the Commission, 
one of the things they mentioned was that Mr Ollerman 
10 
said, among the issues that you're going to touch Mr 
Montana is about is what we call the security syndicate 
that runs PRASA. Chair PRASA doesn't even have that. It's 
got so many security companies that are up and mainly 
regionalised. They're not actually operating at a national 
level, they are more regionalized, appointed at that level, 
and they attempt to elevate Royal and say that Royal – 
Royal was then getting paid by PRASA, and then to sustain 
or to support the former President Zuma is just so false, 
and so I found that it is not based on fact.  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, Mr Montana perhaps – this 
seems a bit clumsy, but I was not suggesting that Royal 
itself, Royal Security had been improperly appointed, there 
is no evidence. What we do have is Prodigy is irregularly 
appointed, I am saying that is the allegation. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 170 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I do not accept, I do not 
accept that. That is why I say that Prodigy, and that is why 
in my response to my email, I said Prodigy is properly 
appointed, 
it 
is 
within 
our 
rights 
to 
enter 
those 
partnerships. 
We may not have gone out on tender like we don't 
do.  You know Chair confinement is an integral part of the 
policy of PRASA where for specific reasons will they say 
we are confining business to that particular – to that 
particular entity or it is the only one that has got either the 
10 
know how or need or some other reason so. So Prodigy 
was not improperly a appointed Chair. What has happened 
is that after as an afterthought I think people tried to find 
reasons where because Prodigy was part of a company that 
people believed belong to a network of Roy Moodley. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But Mr Montana, you must in fairness 
to me listen to the question. I said, there are allegations, I 
am not saying it was Prodigy, and you know because Mr. 
Dingiswayo has raised that already. 
MR MONTANA:   Not with me. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no I understand, but you 
have seen here, and I am merely saying that given that the 
Commission is obliged to consider is there a link? Not 
because Prodigy I mean, not because Royal Security was 
improperly appointed, but that a company linked to Mr 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 171 of 362 
 
Moodley, who has been financing President Zuma is now 
given a contract over which a cloud has been put, I am not 
saying over which there is a cloud.  
That's the only point I am making. 
MR MONTANA:   If we if we go that route, then I have 
another problem with - we are basically saying the criticism 
of this Commission that is targeting certain people that 
Zuma has been targeted. You see Chair in one of my 
submissions I deal with the ANC battles, particular from 
the security companies, okay. I mentioned the company of 
10 
Mr Spoyanda, okay GNS Security. I think that it was also 
mentioned here in Transnet, even at PRASA. But you will 
not hear Chair a lot of these things because people look at 
who stands where in the divide. But I don't think the 
Commission should approach this issue, if there are 
irregularities 
in 
the 
appointment 
of 
Royal 
let 
the 
Commission deal with those facts.  If there is irregularity 
the appointment of Prodigy let's deal with that. They didn't 
I mean, is the link – I was trying to be linked even 
President Zuma, you read too many articles of the stuff of 
20 
the investigation done by for example Werksmans. They 
tried to link some of us to President Zuma.  
They say no even Mr Molefe when he was sitting 
here he actually said in his evidence part of State Capture 
is that people are appointed to serve particular interests. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 172 of 362 
 
And you know what was my post on the Twitter Chair, I said 
well I was appointed by - under the cabinet of President 
Mbeke, I was appointed in 2007 as a CEO of the South 
African Rail Commuter Corporation, and I ...[indistinct] 
President Mbeki.  
So, so I hear what Mr Soni - but I think it would be 
– we will be treading on some dangerous ground that 
actually may invite a lot of criticism to this Commission. 
And I don't think that's where we want to go Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let me say this, Mr Montana, we 
10 
have as a Commission, we must keep an open mind. We 
must keep within our terms of reference.  We must not try 
and manipulate any evidence to put certain people in a bad 
light, or to create a foundation for certain findings to be 
made against people, and we mustn't close our eyes if the 
investigation suggests that we should pursue certain 
people – and I am saying pursue certain people but 
investigates allegations against them. We mustn't do that. 
 
You know in 2018, I think it was during the second 
half of the of the year, we started hearing of oral evidence 
20 
in August 2018. There is a note or memo that I sent to the 
head of the legal team, Mr Pretorius and the head of the 
investigation team, Mr Nomgani, where I dealt with a 
number of things, but one of the things that I said in that 
letter was, it is very important for investigators of the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 173 of 362 
 
Commission and the members of the legal team that when 
they investigate, they investigate whoever, irrespective of 
what their position may be at the moment, irrespective of 
what their position may have been in the past, and 
irrespective of what the position is likely to be in the 
future. That is in black and white, which I said to them.  
That is what I always expected the investigation team and 
the legal team to do, it is in black and white.  
Now, of course as the - as the - as we investigate, 
sometimes people will accuse the Commission of certain 
10 
things, even when they know that they cannot put any 
evidence before anybody if they are asked to put the 
evidence that sometimes there is no why they do that, like 
something like, you know, they commission inspection, it's 
assuming certain people and not other people. It's true. It's 
in the hope that the Commission will start not to do its job 
properly when it comes to certain people, because it is 
scared that people will say you see, we told you, they are 
scared now.   
Now, my approach is that we must do what we are 
20 
required to do. In doing so we must be fair but that doesn't 
mean we must agree to everything, but we must be fair you 
know.  I told you last week that I am happy that you came, 
and you are putting your side of the story. I don't know 
what you think, but I think in all probability, you do feel 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 174 of 362 
 
that you are being heard. You are being heard.  
We don't say we don't make mistakes along the way, we 
may make mistakes, but it doesn't necessarily mean that 
we have certain agendas. And I am hoping that I wish you 
had come much earlier because maybe other people might 
have seen that. Well, if you go there, you're allowed to put 
your side of things, and you will be heard you know, 
whatever happens about what findings will be made, but 
the process you will have been heard and that has got its 
own important basis.  So ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Chair let – thanks very much for that I think 
there is also assuring words I think to many people out 
there.  As you know the commission is being debated 
politically in many platforms in many circles and all of those 
things.  Chair the – let me explain why I put it that way. 
 
You know when you look and I think at some stage 
when we deal with the Werksmans investigations and reports 
you look at all of the – of what had transpired.   
 
When the time comes you will actually see that there 
has been this attempt to link former President with us.  You 
20 
know and for some reason I do not know why I cannot run 
away from President Zuma. 
 
In 2007 my first year as a CEO of PRASA I had to 
write a letter explaining myself to the then Minister of 
Transport.  There was an accusation Chair that I am using 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 175 of 362 
 
PRASA to support a faction in the ANC – the Zuma faction 
against the Mbeki faction.   
 
 Chair I was so angry I wrote angry letters and the 
Minister had to counsel me and say calm down.  We are in 
the middle of a political storm and do not get inside it let it 
pass. 
 
But Chair can I assure you of one thing.  I have 
checked all our major contracts.  All the Werksmans reports 
have been leaked to particular journalists Chair and you will 
see what they have written and what the report said.  In 
10 
some instances using the same words. 
 
Because they have been trying to link Zuma to 
Swifambo, Zuma to Siyangena, Zuma to Rail Security.  When 
you look specifically at PRASA Chair you know the only time 
we – anything that brought us closer even to the Gupta’s 
would have been the SABC program in the morning.  But 
other than that Chair we have never had that and that is why 
I said on Friday you will never find Zuma or the Gupta’s 
lurking 
behind 
any 
of 
the 
programs 
that 
we 
have 
implemented. 
20 
 
So I want to be hanged Chair for my seat I do not 
want to be hanged because I am linked to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  People think I am linked to Zuma for some 
reason and that is why in 2007 as the CEO I had to produce 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 176 of 362 
 
all the tenders that we have managed to prove that we have 
never funded a youth league or anyone else to propel 
President Zuma to office. 
 
So Chair we have been subjected to all of those 
things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  But I think moving forward we have to 
overcome that and also continue to forge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Unity amongst South Africans so that some 
10 
of these divisions we overcome them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please.  Mr Montana can I just ask 
you because I want to finish now with contracts well and I 
have raised one partner that involved Mr Moodley and you.  
The question I want to ask you is do you know over the 
period of time that PRASA was in a contractual relationship 
with Prodigy what amount in total it paid to Prodigy? 
MR MONTANA:  So Chair I would not – I would not have the 
total amount.  I do not know.  I do not know Chair as I sit 
20 
here. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is something we ought to look at do you 
accept? 
MR MONTANA:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Let me ask you a voluted question  PRASA 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 177 of 362 
 
would pay Prodigy because that was the complaint seemingly 
that was raised with your office whether you were aware of it 
and now that it had not been paid and PRASA would then as 
I understand what you have said claimed that money back 
from SETA.  As PRASA – while you were there did PRASA 
claim back all the money it was entitled to from SETA? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I would not – I would not know.  One 
of the things for example that I am raising in my affidavit was 
that there was a time when Mr Allan Genge who was 
responsible for that in fact did not claim some of that money 
10 
and actually I was chastising – I was responding to Mr 
Dingiswayo that if this one issue that is one issue where 
somebody neglected his duties and did not do the work.  So 
if you change this issue – change all of them together. 
 
So – so I do not know how much was – we got from 
both SETA’s Chair.  I would not have checked that but I think 
the annual report of PRASA of that time I could go and verify 
and check the numbers because they will give us a senses to 
how much was paid from the skills levy and – but we did 
include Prodigy Chair into our – into PRASA’s skills plan that 
20 
we submitted and once you submit a report then that is when 
you get paid.  So – so ja but I will check Chair.  I will check I 
am not sure how much was recovered by PRASA. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry it is just one final question on the 
contracts itself.  I can get that in respect of training Prodigy 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 178 of 362 
 
was not the only contractor who could provide the type of 
training that PRASA needed.   
MR MONTANA:  Prodigy was not the only company providing 
training services to PRASA but there are areas where 
Prodigy was the only accredited on some of the programs 
Chair and I deal with that in my affidavit.  And there are 
instances where PRASA used Prodigy’s work to apply for 
funding from SETA and allocate that money to other people.  
I also provide that in detail Chair. 
 
So this matter is more complex than – we may be 
10 
fighting Chair battles of managers at PRASA about whose 
better could we find better because that is my share of 
influence but I am actually dealing with the real issue.  I 
highlight that in the centre.  So it was not the only one but 
there are areas and there are certain competencies where 
other service providers were not accredited or vice versa as 
well Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now the constitution and you must know this 
Section 217 says that when an organ of state procures 
goods or services it must do so in terms of a system that is 
20 
fair, transparent and equitable and cost effective.  Was there 
any assessment of the cost efficacy of services that Prodigy 
was providing compared to other service providers? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair let me deal you quoted Section 217 
which of the constitution and Chair I just want to draw 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 179 of 362 
 
because I think … 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you want to look at it a copy can be 
provided. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I do not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just in case. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no I do not need a copy Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  J. 
MR MONTANA:  I know – I know thanks very much Chair.  I 
know it very well.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  And I will tell you why I know it very well 
because I was part of the Department of Public Works at the 
time when the constitution was drafted and we had a direct 
input into that process Chair.  So unfortunate Section 217 
the way it is being interpreted Chair has become an 
instrument to undermine transformation in the country. 
 
 I deal with that at length as well when it is used in 
broad brush in derailed it is used in that way Chair 
incorrectly.  Okay.   
 
So I think this reference to 217 as a country we need 
20 
to be very careful because at the time when it was drafted 
Chair that is actually an on-going battle in the country 
particularly between within our National Treasury at that time 
Department of State Expenditure, Department of Public 
Works we have started implementing certain measures Chair 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 180 of 362 
 
which later of course had to be incorporated.  The PPPFA 
Chair was to give effect to some of the things that we are 
talking about. 
 
It also became an instrument to undermine all of 
those things. This particular matter Chair and many others 
that are mentioned in the Public Protector report in no way 
undermine Section 217.  And I deal with that for example 
when you look at the – at the Siyangena matter.  I deal with 
that when I look at the Public Protector matter and I think 
Chair the – it is being used in a way that does not assist – 
10 
that does not assist us.   
 
Both the constitution, the PPPFA as a law, the PFMA 
they recognise that entities will also have policies and these 
policies we give effect in one way or the other to what the 
constitution had intended to achieve. 
 
And you will see Chair that the PFMA 00:08:53 
recognise that there are instances where you may have for 
example procurement without – because when you say a 
system – a system that is fair, transparent and competitive 
people have now reduced that to say you must go out on 
20 
tender. 
 
Now it does not mean that Chair and so that is how 
this broad brush and I think the Prodigy contract Chair even 
when I look back if I were at PRASA today and we had this 
kind of an offer of this nature would I sign it?  Yes not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 181 of 362 
 
everything should go out on tender Chair and if this country 
does not understand that we are not going to going to make 
any – we are not going win a nation. 
 
So Section 217 Chair in my application – my review 
application on Public Protector I actually where I deal with 
errors of law I deal specifically with how Section 217 tends 
to be misunderstood.  Because of my background in Public 
Works at the time and our input into the constitution making 
process in 1996. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us – let us be more specific 
10 
because you will recall that I was saying Mr Dingiswayo 
should have said why these contracts he was saying these 
contracts were invalid or certain people were saying these 
contracts were invalid letting close the Prodigy contracts. 
 
You said earlier on the tender process was not 
applicable because this was a partnership.  Now in effect is 
that the ground on which you say 217 did not apply?  Is that 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair no, no.  I – at that time 217 is raised 
now it is a question Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I never dealt with it in respect of Prodigy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay. 
MR MONTANA:  But I have raised it – I have dealt with 217 
CHAIRPERSON:  In a different context. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 182 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  In relation to other matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Specifically the Public Protector report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR MONTANA:  The point I made though at the beginning 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Was that did we have to go out on tender? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  To an offer that we received and I say no. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And I still maintain that position Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no that is fine. 
MR MONTANA:  And it is not in violation of 217 Chair from 
where I sit Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. But – but that – I take it that that 
because you say this offer was an offer of a partnership let 
us partner together with this.  I take it that that is what you 
mean and you – you are meaning for part – offers of 
partnerships you do not have to go out on open tender. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  No not all of them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Let us say you have an – I think at that time 
we were discussing an unsolicited bid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 183 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  If you have an unsolicited bid the company 
– your company is going to run that project, pay for it and all 
of those things.  You may then have to look at what Treasury 
rules. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Regulations says in that particular respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So I am not saying in general. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  And that is why Chair earlier on. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  We dealt with the issue of the 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And I think my point was misunderstood. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I was not dealing with the award I am 
saying once Fifa for example comes into the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  When they contract with PRASA for train 
services and all of those things there is no tender process 
20 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  There cannot be a tender process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Fifa owns the world cup. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 184 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  It is their own event Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So you cannot go out on tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  The second report of the Public Protector 
Volume 2 of derail drafted by Advocate Mkwebane it 
dismissed all the matters but found on one Chair that and it 
says it – the complaint is sustained.  It is saying PRASA and 
Transnet when PRASA got Njangi Haus which is an old 
10 
railway building PRASA should have gone out on tender.  
 
Now Chair the law says you go out on – where it is 
not practical to do so we cannot – we want – we want Njangi 
Haus it is part of the railway station we want to run our 
operations there.   
 
Now two state owned – state owned company cannot 
go to another and say let us transfer that building.  We are 
told it does not actually create value Chair.  
 
So I am simply saying there are instances where 
either a partnership – for example we had a partnership with 
20 
FIfa. We could not go out on tender Chair.  But of course it – 
was it transparent?  Yes it was transparent.  Was the pricing 
a competitive one?  Price yes was a competitive one.   
 
So – so I am simply saying Chair not that everything 
we do we are reducing everything to tenders and that is why 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 185 of 362 
 
there is all these big fights about tenders.  But on this one 
Chair I do not hold a view that it was in violation of the 
PFMA or Treasury Regulations and most importantly Section 
217 of the Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Soni because I kind of read 
where you were going with the question – 217 question I 
think you need to just … 
ADV SONI SC:  Now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Put it on the table so that it can be dealt 
with properly Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  We – yes.  Mr Montana whatever it is you 
accept that their competitors to Prodigy who were pro – who 
could provide those services.  Very same services and I 
know you say but there were some only Prodigy could 
provide but there were other services which – other services 
could provide.  You have already said that is true. 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair let us not go into the world of 
speculation.  Let us be very specific on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe let us do it this way.  Well 
Section 217 talks about whenever you are going to procure 
20 
goods or services what Prodigy was going to do was provide 
services or you say no?  They were going to train your 
employees. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I am not going to change.  I 
am not changing.  I am not changing it. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 186 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I accept that but I just want us to 
see – to go step by step.  Do you accept that Prodigy was 
going to provide services to PRASA by way of providing 
training or you say no, no, no. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is not services. 
MR MONTANA:  Prodigy is appointed or is given an award 
by a SETA and they decide with PRASA.  Now – now Section 
217 I want to link it.  It requires us to put in place a – when 
we buy goods and services a system that is fair, transparent, 
10 
competitive, all that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And Chair the policy of PRASA it defines 
that system.  Unless it is something – including of course 
where we do not go through competitive tender processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja exceptions. 
MR MONTANA:  It is part of – it is part of those systems – is 
part of that system. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Therefore Chair unless if you say Mr Soni 
20 
would say to me you as a Group CEO you did not put in 
place okay?  A system of – a system of that is fair, 
competitive, that meets Section 217 and that I would 
challenge there Chair. 
 
But – but a confinement on exception Chair does not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 187 of 362 
 
mean that that system is not in place.  And so we – we are 
taking one contract to define the system. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And that is where my challenge is Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I understand what you are saying.  
You 
see 
as 
I 
understand 
this 
procurement 
laws 
and 
regulations you have a general rule and that general rule is 
you are an organ of state and it seeks to procure goods or 
services 
you 
must 
go 
through 
a 
fair, 
cost 
effective, 
competitive process okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now then you have the regulations or 
policies 
or 
Treasury 
instructions 
which 
say 
there 
are 
circumstances where you can – where you are entitled not to 
follow the general rule.  So the exception is to the general 
rule.   
One of those is if you are faced with an emergency – 
no I do not know if they use that term but if you are faced 
with an emergency there is no time to invite tenders or bids 
so you can go to once service provider and say hey there 
20 
was a storm here this is what has happened and they  - that 
is accepted – it is permitted let me put it that way. 
 
And then there is a situation where they say if a sole 
I think they call it a sole source situation where that provider 
of a product or service is the only one that provides those – 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 188 of 362 
 
that kind of – type of product or service to say in other words 
it will not – it will not serve any purpose to invite bids 
because this is the only one.  Okay.  And there – there may 
be other exceptions okay.   
 
So – so – but those exceptions kick in because you 
are trying to procure goods or services.  If you are not trying 
to procure goods or services then they would not kick in and 
you would not even use the general rule you know because it 
falls outside what – what the 00:21;05 system is there for. 
 
So when I was asking you whether you accept that 
10 
what Prodigy was going to do in terms of this contract was to 
render a service it was meant to see whether if we take – go 
step by step where you are going to say yes I accept that 
price and then maybe you are going to say but there is an 
exception one of these exceptions to the general rule is what 
I rely on.  That is what I was trying to do.  You understand 
this? 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I hear you clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay, alright. 
MR MONTANA:  And I think in principle yes I agree with you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You agree okay. 
MR MONTANA:  When we – when we take a decision Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  That we are going to go that route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 189 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:  And that must apply unless it has exception. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Of course there are also where it is not 
practical. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  To do that for apparent reasons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair if you look at – we go back to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So maybe before you proceed therefore 
what I am looking for and I suspect what Mr Soni  
10 
MR MONTANA:  Soni 
CHAIRPERSON:  May be looking for too is which one of the 
exceptions that are known to the general rule you may be 
relying on or whether the position is that we do not even get 
to the exceptions because I say this is not goods or 
services.  That is – that is what we are trying to do. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think – I think that the – for me the 
starting point because even that was not – I need to reflect 
to the commission what was the thinking at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  And we debate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course. 
MR MONTANA:  And that is why we call this a partnership.  
Because I say here are two organisations of course the 
starting point is whether Prodigy was properly appointed by 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 190 of 362 
 
– because that is where the capacity or the skills – that is 
what 
different 
organisations 
for 
service 
providers 
and 
training compete to provide for that.   
The money comes from this particular entity – this – 
what is called the services it is the one that says we appoint 
you, you are going to do this for us than they go and partner 
with whoever they do – they deem to table for that.  
 
Now – now Chair that is why I was putting that in the 
realm of – of all other sorts of partnerships that we have.  
And with what you are raising it actually raises a question 
10 
that even some of the partnerships that we have or would 
define or that we had at the time I was there would we define 
them as goods and services in that sense and it may require 
a re-thinking Chair but where we stood at that time this was 
a partnership we did not require that kind of a root and I 
think of four or five other partnerships that we had entered 
into at that time that even though there was money there was 
some kind of service that was – was being used but I am not 
sure Chair that it takes you to a point where PRASA had 
identified a need.   
20 
There is people – remember Chair part of the issues 
that we – we operate also in a commercial environment.  
People come with ideas, people come with proposals.  And I 
think it is because – because of that that is sure Treasury 
trying to now regulate that in the form of unsolicited bids and 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 191 of 362 
 
putting regulations to manage that.   
My view Chair is that when I look at this I do not 
think that it falls into that and I think that maybe the fine line 
that we have been drawn between the partnership or – I 
mean look at how people for example abuse the issue of 
what – emergency procurement.  Is there and everyone will 
try to find a reason for it to be an emergency when in fact it 
is not an emergency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know I have heard quite some evidence. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  You know that in the PRASA environment 
when we deal with the issue of Siyangena we deal with the 
2010 World Cup emergency in January 2010.  So yes Chair I 
think that my view is that the commission will have to 
evaluate this in totality and say what was the thinking but 
from where I sit I think that there is a space the Public 
Protector ruled on one matter involving PRASA where there 
was a partnership and said that it should have gone out on 
tender.   
20 
I am not sure if I agree Chair but I think we just have 
to evaluate the entire evidence and make a – and maybe that 
would be one the recommendations where the commission 
say you want to amend that part?  Make it clear, structure it 
in that way so that there are no – there are no – you know – 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 192 of 362 
 
grounds where people can either manipulate or there is no 
clarity 00:26:01. 
 
At the time wherein that Chair and I think I will have 
to check there are certain things Chair and I do not want to 
say Prodigy will fit on one source because that is not what 
we discussed at that time. 
 
But if you look at its capabilities and what it was able 
to do somebody was going to come and say but did you 
check it, did you test it in the market?  So I do not want to 
go to that extent Chair because that is not without let us 
10 
enter it in a partnership and the written word is there Chair 
from me written in my own – it is my handwriting and I said 
look let us enter into a MOU.  I am not sure Chair that that 
violates or the intention was even to violate 217 as it stands 
in the constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – I just want to summarise what I think 
you are saying and then you can say whether my summary is 
– is a fair summary or not. 
 
You are saying at the time you took the view that this 
was a partnership and that where an organ of state is getting 
20 
involved into a partnership for something to be done there 
was no obligation to go into a tender process.  Is that 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair you can – may repeat that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay maybe – now I remember 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 193 of 362 
 
something that you said. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Earlier on.  Okay.  You – at the time you 
took the view that this project – this project that you – that 
Prodigy wanted to get involved in with PRASA was going to 
be a partnership. 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
MR MONTANA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is point 1.  Point 2 you took the view 
10 
that this particular one did not require PRASA to go into a 
tender process.   
So I must just clarify here whether your position was 
that all partnerships as long as it is a partnership you do not 
need to use an open tender or whether you are saying this – 
but it is some partnerships and this was one of them you do 
not have to go through a process of a tender process. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair if you recall earlier on I was talking 
about the – some partnerships depending on the conditions 
under which they happen. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  For example here the deciding factor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Is Prodigy is not coming to PRASA and 
saying we want to do training. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 194 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  It is saying we are being awarded this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  We want to – you to work with PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Of course I think the issue that maybe 
Section 217 or the competitive fair process will come when 
we then move beyond a 300.  For example I say… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the 3000. 
MR MONTANA:  That it arise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I think Chair there is a big question I never 
thought about it at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  With hindsight I think that that question may 
arise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Is this is a – when PRASA bought Njangi 
Haus from Transnet PRASA made a conscious decision at 
that we are buying this building from Transnet because the 
20 
process of a Section 54 of the PFMA they take long to 
transfer that business through getting government approval 
and all of those things.   
And we knew that we are buying that building not from any 
other – we were not looking for any other building we wanted 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 195 of 362 
 
Njangi Haus located where the main rail operations are 
which is historically a railway building.  So we are not buying 
any other building.  So Chair that decides we did Brexit 
development. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   The land belonged to the City of Durban 
plus – and it had, in fact, taken that land, entered into a 
partnership. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Now when we wanted to build our station 
10 
under the ...[indistinct] we could not go out and tender.  It 
was not practical.  We could not do that.  But we need a 
phase linking Brick City to the entire railway line.  We 
could afford to go out on tender because that was 
practical.  That was possible.  So you make decisions on 
that basis.  So here, Prodigy says I have got this thing.  I 
am offering it to PRASA.   
 
Once you accept it, Chair, it is not any other.  
And it means, of course, that the Seta had its own process 
on why they gave that to Prodigy and not to someone else 
20 
but if PRASA decided to go we are going to train 5 000 
people, PRASA decide and this is going to be our 
requirement.  It is obliged to follow ...[intervenes]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
MR MONTANA:   ...to go out and tender and that would be 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 196 of 362 
 
the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So this are not the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And that is the kind of explanation I am 
trying to provide. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no I understand your 
explanation completely.  So the deciding factor seems to 
me from what you have said in relation to the first 300 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...was that Prodigy had been appointed 
or awarded, I am not sure what the correct term is 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...by the Seta, had been awarded a 
certain amount of money ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that had been put aside and had been, 
in effect, authorised to go and to training. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Anything else, really, did not make any 
difference.  That is what made it a difference to you.  Is 
that right? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 197 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think I said they were bringing 
in not only the award ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...but we also have to go and check. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   At that authority when we gave Prodigy 
this thing, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...I think ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...there are certain competencies, there 
are certain things, Chair, how the companies were given to 
do one of those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR 
MONTANA:   
Once 
you 
got 
all 
of 
that, 
Chair 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...we were then able to come to a 
determination. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   To answer ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The question. 
MR MONTANA:   ...the question that Mr Soni is raising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 198 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   But as I see it right now, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   You ask me do I think and I think there is 
somewhere I wrote – I think there is an email where I said 
that – but how do you want the partnership?  Because for 
me the partnership – we even regulated in terms of a 
different policy, not as SCM policy but the sponsorship 
policy maybe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But people have said, they have criticised 
10 
us on the World Cup because they applied.  And I think the 
SCM policy, Chair, is not an over policy of a business.  It is 
one policy of a business.  Sometimes you find conflict 
between some of that and we attend to reduce everything 
that no here is the standard.  And I do not think that is – 
that should be the case, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  So you used the word 
partnership to say going out on tender does not apply 
because this is a partnership but in the end you say, you 
know, the fact that Seta had given them Prodigy or 
20 
awarded or appointed, that is what made the difference in 
my own mind as to whether we should go out on tender or 
not. 
MR MONTANA:   Because the bursaries, Chair, belong now 
Prodigy.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 199 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So if it agrees to work with us, it is 
effectively that to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So it is bringing something to the party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   What is it that the last word of business, 
the relationship starts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   When FIFA comes into the country, it runs 
10 
the World Cup, Chair, and PRASA does not say we are 
going to advertise, this is for the World Cup.  We entered 
into an agreement, a partnership with FIFA because they 
arrived, the branding belongs to FIFA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   We want to become a party into that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The same happened in Brick City.  There 
is – some of my executives were saying but PRASA is a 
state-owned entity.  Can...  and it is appropriate land.  I 
20 
said but where do you see something like that?  The land – 
the leading party in the partnership between the City of 
Durban and is a sphere of government.  We cannot take 
that land over just...   
 
So we could not build our railway line or rather 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 200 of 362 
 
the station outside of a development.  We could not bring a 
contract and say we are advertising services.  Appoint a 
contractor who comes and dig in someone’s land.  We had 
to agree with that person and say part of the development 
of the mall, we wanted to include the station.  So we will 
not go out on tender, that it is not practical, Chair.   
 
You cannot bring contractors to build a mall and 
then bring contractor to build an underground station in 
that mall because – and even from a structural point of 
view, they are going to have a problem. 
10 
 
But if PRASA decides Chair on its own no offers 
of any kind from anyone that it wants to train a number of 
people it is obliged in terms of the procurement laws of the 
Republic to go out on that route. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  and then just to complete because 
you have touched on the 3000.  you already said that you 
didn't think about in that way at the time ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   At the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...but when it comes to - when it came to 
PRASA expanding this scope of the arrangement with 
20 
Prodigy to include the 3 000, maybe that is where PRASA 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...should not have gone out on tender.  
and you say it at that time you did not think of it that way 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 201 of 362 
 
but now you think maybe that is what should have 
happened. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think it arises ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR MONTANA:   And there are two ways of dealing with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The first one they say:  No, we think for 
this one let us go out on tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   You well lose the values and the benefit 
10 
that you have acquired from that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because they may not translate softly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   From a cost point of view you are losing 
the benefits.  Remember the issue is value for money at all 
times.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The second option will be to say:  No, 
Seta(?) East transparent and is fair.  Let us subject it to a 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Process. 
MR MONTANA:   ...to the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Now that doesn't mean a tender, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 202 of 362 
 
necessarily Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR MONTANA:   It means that, let the Adjudication 
Committee looks at it and say – because Chair this is very 
important.  so you may go out on tender, you may want to 
ask for increasing the scope of that work and I think that 
these documents are telling us all about that Chair.  So, 
yes, I accept what you are saying, Chair.  It may - the 
extension of that scope and then the numbers naturally 
invite that question Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Which at that time we are not dealing with 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...but as you speak today, I do recognise 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that in fact the scope maybe big 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   ...and that phase(?) may be different. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And therefore you may want to go free 
that process, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 203 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am hoping there is clarity that has 
emerged. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed.  There is Chairperson.  I do 
not want to unnecessarily ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...go into trivial matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There are two matters that arises.  
Can I ask you, Mr Montana, to please look at page 138?  
10 
That is the invitation to - from Prodigy to you. 
MR MONTANA:   Page 138? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   138, yes.  That is MNG-3. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in the second paragraph it says: 
“Prodigy has been awarded bursary funding for 
300 learnerships from the Seta – from the 
Services Seta via the discretionary ground 
process...” 
 
That is what they say. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Can I ask you this?  You 
accepted this on the very same day.  And I know there 
were discussions previously because they say that in 
paragraph – the first paragraph. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 204 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Were you involved in those 
discussions? 
MR MONTANA:   No, not at all Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now were you aware whether it was 
only Prodigy that had been awarded that bursary funding?  
Because when I look at this it does not say it was the only 
entity awarded that fund(?).   
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair.  I do not think it was the only 
one but I think that Prodigy is the one that came to PRASA 
10 
and say we want to use ours with you.  the others may 
have used them in other environment's but yes I do not 
think it was the only company. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But then I am saying to you 
Mr Montana that it is not for us to water down the wording 
off the constitution. We are not talking about ordinary law.  
we are talking about the fundamental document that 
determines our public authorities conduct themselves.   
 
Now if Prodigy was not the only entity which had 
that facility, is there not - and I would like you to look at it 
20 
now - is there not the necessity to say are the in entities 
and should be not look at Section 217 so that Prodigy is 
not 
unfairly 
given 
an 
advantage 
because 
it 
simply 
approached...? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think and I want to build on the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 205 of 362 
 
conversation and the discussion that we had earlier on 
Chair because I think my comments on 217 in my review 
application 
which 
is 
part 
of 
my 
annexures 
to 
the 
Commission.   
 
It is very clear Chair.  We have to decide - the 
Constitution says that.  The Constitution also says the 
organs of state will then implement these systems that we 
have because I do not think that it can be Chair that we 
say systems of - how do I put it - a fair transparent 
competitive process. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Cost effective ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Cost effective as well.  Indeed.  A 
process.  And we say that the organs of state are required 
to put that in place.  When they - and then we have the 
PFMA.  We have for example the triple PFMA which both of 
them give exceptions and exemptions as well to what is 
happening.   
 
Now Chair, I think what we should be because I 
think also - so that we do not also speculate about it.  We 
have got to do three things.  The first one we need to 
20 
assess to evaluate purpose which other companies were 
given and specifically for what competencies.   
 
What are the areas where for example Prodigy 
have these competencies and we others did not or they 
were given the same thing Chair.  That is the first issue.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 206 of 362 
 
But I think even if they were two three other companies – if 
two other companies also approached PRASA and PRASA 
then rejected them and take Prodigy, that would have been 
unfair.  But we do not know of any other company Chair.   
 
But I do not think because Seta a whole range of 
other things.  My view would be that we have the 
Commission may want to raise that issue with the Services 
Seta and say give us an input.  Tell us about this 
organisation.  Who had this thing said that when you gave 
- because that will help us Chair.   
10 
 
That is the first issue that is there.  But I do not 
share the view that any offer of a service requires a tender 
Chair.  And if you say it doesn't require a tender 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you mean every. 
MR MONTANA:   Every ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...offer of a service. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Because some level of service is involved 
20 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But it doesn't mean every time you buy 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 207 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   ...you procure goods and services.  At a 
time there is a route to go.  and I do not think that was the 
intention of 217 either.  So.  but I think as a guiding 
principle it is correct.  I support that but not in all 
instances Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And where organisations come to the 
party, not for you to buy services.  To then say we want to 
work with you here.  I think Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Let me give you an example Chair.  There 
is a school – there is an ...[indistinct] called Kukwano(?)  It 
trains young people and in maths and such And we have 
partnered with them.  No - And that is about, we choice - 
we want to position PRASA.  Again this is regulated by our 
sponsor sponsorship policy, not by hour ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   SCM. 
MR MONTANA:   ...not by our SCM policy.  and so as you 
raise it Chair, I realise that they may be instances of 
conflict or that there is not a clear line between and we 
20 
may have to look at that again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But for now I still maintain, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I think that year we have got a better deal 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 208 of 362 
 
with the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine.  I think 
what we should do - what should be done Mr Soni is this.  I 
understand Mr Soni to be saying, at that time I didn't think 
there was an obligation on PRASA to go out on tender in 
regard to the first 300.   
 
As I sit here I still have the same view but 
because of the discussion I think it may be that we should 
have but we did not think so.  I think in that - in the light of 
what should be done, we should just get all the facts that 
10 
we can get.  So the suggestion is that, let us establish how 
– from the Seta, how this so called bursaries ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   How are they ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...because they - and how they are 
awarded and the contracts because I see in this later 
Prodigy said they were attaching the copy of the bursary 
contract or they say a copy of the bursary contract.  Ja.  
but it is not attached yet  
MR MONTANA:   Yet, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So.  Because the terms of that contract 
20 
which must be, I guess in the Seta and Prodigy, might 
affect these issues that we are looking at, you know.  And 
you remember earlier on I was asking Mr Montana asked 
you the prices of payment because I was trying to see who 
is obliged to make the payments because on the one hand 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 209 of 362 
 
Mr Montana was saying this meant that the Seta add set 
aside money for training but it had not given Prodigy the 
cash.   
 
But at the same time I was hearing that PRASA 
would be paying and training back and so on.  So It is 
important to just get the actual fact.  How does it work and 
so on and so on.  And then once we have got all of that as 
well as including what actually happened in this particular 
case when the Seta awarded Prodigy this so called 
bursaries, the bursary funding.   
10 
 
And then once we have got all of those facts 
then we can - I think we can deal with the issue properly.  
And it would be important that at that stage we hear your 
comments Mr Montana because then you would also be 
having those facts.   
 
But I think in regard to the 3000, you are much 
closer to making a concession then you are with the 300.  I 
think you are closer to making the concession there. 
MR MONTANA:   No, but Chair, I think I am saying that 
when you get it in the light of this discussion ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...it may be – unless if there – and that is 
why I am saying there are two routes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   If it was extended without any of those 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 210 of 362 
 
processes, we are here to - an open tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.   
MR MONTANA:   And we are going through adjudication 
Prodigy ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...to get pass there.  Then, of course 
Chair, you did not follow process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But if the scope was dealt with by an 
Adjudication Committee and it recommended that it be 
10 
approved, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That would then ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...that will still be within the – that system 
of governance ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that we want to put in place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But basically, you are dealing with this 
two separate because the training might be the same, 
different categories of people being trained but the process 
is not exactly the same.  So you are saying that it looks 
20 
like – well, you are saying, I think, you are not sure 
whether in regard to the 3 000 the process that you 
followed included taking this matter to the Adjudication 
Committee of PRASA. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 211 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you are saying that if you did and 
that committee aid go ahead or something like that, you 
would say it was lawful.   
MR MONTANA:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are saying if that did not even 
happen then you would concede that then you did not 
follow ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   The issues ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But even Chair, when the Adjudication 
10 
Committee would have said yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The Commission having taken all the 
evidence ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and still ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   ...on the Seta/Prodigy ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   We still do not want to obtain an opinion 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   ...and say is this making the test of 217. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And then all of them at PRASA are 
considered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no ...[intervenes]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 212 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   But my fundamental point, Chair, is that 
where an entity private or public brings something – you 
cannot take out something to tender that does not belong 
to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And that is the point I am making. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Prodigy owned the bursaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   They are not PRASA’s bursaries Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So could not take them out on tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I think the point you raise when you 
say what is the effect of the fact that the Seta awarded 
Prodigy these bursaries, this bursary funding, it is a 
legitimate point to look at.  That is why it becomes 
important also to say if there were terms and conditions to 
which governed this award to Prodigy by the Seta, we 
ought to know. 
 
I mean, I – if for example the Seta said to 
20 
Prodigy:  We are setting aside this funding for you to train 
staff falling within the following categories at PRASA and 
that company and that company, it may be that you say:  
Well, the Seta has chosen us.  So how can you say let us 
go to tender? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 213 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So now I do not know because I do not 
know this contract between Prodigy and the Seta.  I do not 
know whether that was the position or not. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know.  I think it is a legitimate point 
you have raised.  Let us look at it.  Let us get all the facts 
and then we take it from there.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, just finally on this.  
Pages 138 and 139 is Prodigy’s letter and I am just dealing 
10 
with the letter, not your inscription on the letter. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You will see that the heading of the 
letter of is Piloting of Centre of Excellence Model and 
Learnership Implementation.  If you go to page 139 in the 
middle of the second paragraph, they say: 
“Should Prodigy be awarded the contract to 
pilot the Centre of Excellence Model, it would 
assist PRASA in accessing the aforementioned 
funding window...” 
20 
 
The point I want to make is.  Nowhere here 
...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, in which paragraph are you on? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry.  On page 139 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The second paragraph from the top. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 214 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja.  It says in the second sentence: 
“Should Prodigy be awarded the contract to 
pilot the Centre of Excellence Model, it would 
assist PRASA in accessing the aforementioned 
funding window...” 
 
The point I want to make, Mr Montana, is just 
because you have raised the fact or the question that they 
were offering you a partnership.  There is no offer of a 
partnership. 
 
The 
first 
mention 
of 
a 
partnership, 
Mr Montana, is in the second sentence of what you write 
10 
where you say: 
“We should enter into a partnership with 
Prodigy...” 
 
But the idea of a partnership comes from you, 
not from Prodigy.   
MR MONTANA:   Do you want my comment? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I think let us read the first 
paragraph of that letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Because I do not think there are any 
inconsistencies there.  I think that we are dealing with the 
word.  It says: 
“It 
is 
further 
to 
discussion 
held 
from 
March 2010 with respect to the Centre of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 215 of 362 
 
Excellence Model, Prodigy hereby confirms 
that it is able to provide PRASA with 300 
funded learnerships that will fast track the 
piloting of the Centre of Excellence Model...” 
 
Now 
Chair, 
so 
this 
– 
they 
are 
giving 
us 
something.  In return, we accept what they have given to 
us and say we will use that to start our Centre of 
Excellence.  So I think Chair – I do not think that – maybe 
Mr Soni is trying to say Prodigy did not use the word 
partnership as is used in my notes there, not – I do not see 
10 
it in the letter that is there.  And I then say we must enter 
into a formal MOU in respect of this matter.   
 
So whether you call it – that call it there is a 
form of partnership.  And I think the paragraph that – the 
sentence that Mr Soni read, it actually talks about if 
Prodigy should be awarded a contract to pilot the Centre of 
Excellence.   
 
Again, even the word contract, Chair, in that 
particular respect, I do not know.  In any agreement that 
you formulise or is – you reach agreement on, even if it is 
20 
verbal or written, it will be a contract.  We have entered 
into partnerships.  Real signed contracts.  And we will refer 
to that in that way.   
 
So Chair I think for me being – my handwriting 
notes, my notes there, are quite consistent with both the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 216 of 362 
 
letter and spirit of what Prodigy is offering there.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well, Mr Montana, I do not want us to 
debate this.  I am going to disagree with you.  There is no 
consistency between what you have proposed and the 
proposal from Prodigy.  We will disagree on it and at the 
end of the day, it is a question of interpreting what they 
have said, your response to it. 
 
And I just want to point out that if you look at 
MNG-4 on page 141, you will see that what emerges is the 
partnership agreement, not the contract to pilot the Centre 
10 
of Excellence that they have proposed in their letter of 10 
June. 
MR MONTANA:   But they have – if you again, Chair – 
again, we – I am happy that Mr Soni says it is a matter that 
we can debate and – well, I am using two words.  I am 
using partnership and then later I use the word MOU.  Now 
if we follow what Mr Soni says, it therefore means that the 
MMD-4, it could have been a contract, a partnership or it 
could have been an MOU but we are giving effect to one 
and the same thing that is proposed in the letter.   
20 
 
And Chair, why did I write on top of it?  Because 
this was not a secret.  I did not even know that the five or 
ten years down the line I would be sitting here, debating 
and looking at my words.  At that time, we have received 
this offer that 300 bursaries awarded by the Seta.  Can it 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 217 of 362 
 
be used at PRASA?  And we used that to – as a 
springboard for our Centre of Excellence.   
 
And Chair we have accepted that and I think for 
me, that is the essence of what you said of what we 
wanted to achieve.  They did not need to go through a 
tender.  I think Chair, I am saying ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us look into it. 
MR MONTANA:   Let us look at that.  I think we will discuss 
the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   And I am quite – I think that is my view on 
the matter Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well, let me confirm this.  When one 
reads this letter of Prodigy, when I read it at least, I get 
the impression that PRASA wanted to pilot its Centre of 
Excellence Model.  That is what PRASA wanted to do.   
 
It gives the impression that it so happened that 
Prodigy was looking for an entity whose employees it could 
train because it had been awarded this bursary funding.  I 
am saying that simply because of how the letter is worded.   
20 
“It 
is 
further 
to 
discussion 
held 
from 
March 2010 with respect to the Centre of 
Excellence Model, Prodigy hereby confirms 
that it is able to provide PRASA with 300 
funded learnerships that will fast track the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 218 of 362 
 
piloting of the Centre of Excellence Model...” 
 
So it gives me the impression that [word cut] 
wanted to pilot to this model and they happened to want an 
entity whose employees they would train and then there 
was – then they made this proposal which is if you let us 
train your staff you will benefit because then your project – 
then you will be piloting your Centre of Excellence.  Is that 
what happened?  Is that a fair reading or not really? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think I will say yes and no.  It is 
quite clear to me, Chair, when I look at this letter that this 
10 
letter was a culmination point, was not the beginning so we 
do not have, as we sit here, details of the kind of 
discussions that took place between PRASA and Prodigy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Prior to the letter. 
MR MONTANA:   Prior to this letter because that is very 
important, Chair.  And secondly, we do not have the details 
of the basis and the terms and conditions of the award by 
the SETA. 
We are offered this thing, we think that we reached 
an agreement, so we need to look at that because that will 
20 
then tell us and answer Mr Soni’s question and ultimately 
the bigger question about is this in violation of 217 or not 
or should be dealt with differently. 
 
So I think a more factual approach, Chair, will help 
us to come to a common determination of - but when we 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 219 of 362 
 
approved it at that time, Chair, I think that Prodigy was 
giving us or putting something on the table and I stated 
earlier on that they were not giving to us just for mahala, 
Chair, because it is quite clear that their business is 
training.  So if they link with our centre, of course that they 
are strategically go in a better position to even do more.  
So that is the nature of the animal, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I – I may have asked this question 
before because I was trying at that time to establish who 
actually ultimately and in effect paid Prodigy for the 
10 
training services that it provided to PRASA employees? 
MR MONTANA:   It was PRASA, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was PRASA? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even in regard to the 300 because I am 
talking about the 300. 
MR MONTANA:   No, I do not think in regard to – no, the 
rest of the other training, Chair, the first one I think it was 
– you will recall, Chair, was a model here.  They offer you, 
you train, you recover the money. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So both for the 300 and the 3 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   PRASA would recover the money from the 
different SETAs.  You remember the other money is not 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 220 of 362 
 
only coming from the Services SETA it also comes from the 
Transport SETA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the SETA that they are talking about 
here is which SETA? 
MR MONTANA:   For the 300 [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Services SETA, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But the others were – the other, Chair, 
the other 3 000 was not part of that, that will come from 
the …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I mean the SETA, the Services 
SETA put aside a certain amount of money. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For Prodigy to conduct training.  Prodigy 
ended up or rather conducted training in respect of initially 
300 employees of PRASA.  Now I would expect that they 
were paid through the money that the SETA put aside. 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, PRASA will spend the money 
but will still cover that same money from the SETA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But will it spend the exact amount of 
20 
money that the SETA has put aside or what? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, it could exceed that 
amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Remember, SETA tells you about what it 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 221 of 362 
 
can find but that may not be the real total cost of training. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So if it is beyond that, even what you 
claim, you are not going to get everything that you claim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But you can get a large chunk of what you 
spent on top of that project then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so what is the difference between a 
company such as Prodigy coming to PRASA without going 
to – without being awarded bursary funding by SETA and 
10 
saying we would like to train your staff, we think that you 
can benefit from the training that we can give your staff 
and for that service we are going to charge R100 million or 
whatever.  What is the difference between …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because in the later case obviously they 
must look to you for payment.  Now if they have gone to 
the SETA and the SETA has put aside money for this 
training is it still PRASA that ultimately pays them?  So 
what is the need to go to the SETA? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   With regard to – I think this is 
linked…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:    
CHAIRPERSON:   The 300. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, this is linked to skills mainly, Chair, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 222 of 362 
 
because you are raising an important issue.  I mean, the 
other question linked to what you have just raised, Chair, 
why does SETAs not, for example, why does it have to go 
through service providers and not for example linked 
directly with PRASA and I think the question is who has got 
the skills?  We run trains, we run buses, we run property 
and therefore we may not have the – what is it called, the 
necessary accreditation in those areas that are there so 
that is why we have got the service providers.  Is it a more 
efficient model, Chair?  I think that is another question.   
10 
Perhaps the SETAs should as a first line say public 
entities or other organs of state, here is money that you 
can access, you can apply and part of that is happening, 
Chair, when you can apply but I think that there are certain 
areas where you do that through the service providers.  I 
do not know what is the rationale, the logic, Chair, that is 
not my space but I know that there will be offered – we will 
be offered to use the services.  So we have to then check 
under what circumstances was this offered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja, I think we …[intervenes] 
20 
MR MONTANA:   What were the times and then we clarify 
that question first. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think we need to find more information 
because for me if you say you are granting some student a 
bursary, that means you will pay for it, you pay for their 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 223 of 362 
 
studies.   
So this says the SETA awarded Prodigy was refunding for 
training so I have difficulty understanding how it could 
come about that then PRASA must pay in full for the 
training.  I can understand if the arrangement is the SETA 
will pay a certain percentage and then PRASA must maybe 
cough up whatever but we need to establish that because 
also in terms of who is going to make the – who will pay, 
who has the obligation to pay, that might affect the 
question of whether we are dealing with a tender situation 
10 
or not if, in effect, PRASA is not going to pay or is going to 
pay a very small amount.  So we will need to just get 
information on that.  I certainly do not know much about 
how SETAs operate and [indistinct – dropping voice].   
Okay, alright.  We are at quarter past four.  I have in 
mind that we will go up to five because there is an evening 
session but I must say already tomorrow there is space.  
Tomorrow there is space so to the extent that – because I 
think it is clear we are not going to finish with Mr Montana.  
There is a witness that is scheduled for tomorrow but he will 
20 
not be long so we might have to decide whether he should 
come in the morning, finish with him and then Mr Montana 
continues, if available, or whether we ask him to come later 
in the day, we start with Mr Montana.  Are you available 
tomorrow, 
Mr 
Montana? 
 
You 
say 
you 
are 
under 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 224 of 362 
 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, you put me in a very difficult 
position.  Mr Soni had confirmed that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we would finish today. 
MR MONTANA:   That by five we will be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The Commission will not want to see me 
here again, Chair.  Chair, I will be guided by you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And then perhaps we can try to do the 
10 
other two remaining matters tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is fine.  So, no, no, I think 
that is good because we would like to try and finalise and I am 
sure you would like to get to the end of the process as well.  
So let us take a break now, ten minutes break, come back and 
continue until five and then we will adjourn until tomorrow and 
then hopefully we finish tomorrow.  But I think what is 
important is that issues are being dealt with, we are doing 
justice to the issues and that is important.  Okay, let us take 
an adjournment, it is about seventeen minutes past four, let us 
20 
resume at half past four. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 225 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might too far from the mic, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Chairperson, sorry, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it possible to bring that mic of yours 
more to the centre because I think you do move away from 
it and it is right at the corner. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay.  If that will not interfere 
with your... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, at paragraph 14.17 Mr 
Dingiswayo says that after he was dismissed the SLA that 
he had reservations about were signed on the 29 May, is 
that correct?  This is at paragraph 14.17 at page 106. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I do not know the date but I know 
that second addendum was signed by Ms Koka but also I do 
not the specific concern that Mr Dingiswayo had, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  He then raises certain 
questions about the enforceability of the contract.  We do 
not need to date them now because the only reason, Mr 
20 
Montana, is that that whole matter is before court at the 
moment.  We have agreed on that. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  May I then ask you to look at 
paragraph 14.21?  September 2017, and he has been 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 226 of 362 
 
corrected on this, it is in February/March 2017, that was 
the evidence.  Ms Shunmugum – now she is the lady who 
wrote to you, you might remember, asked to meet Mr 
Holele to discuss the issue of payment.  Says: 
“However, it not Ms Shunmugum who attended but 
Mr Moodley.  Mr Holele and Mr Rakgoathe, the 
general manager, represented PRASA.” 
And he says Mr Holele will deal with that meeting.  I do not 
know if you have followed the evidence given by Mr Holele, 
in fact he was the first witness called in respect of PRASA 
10 
and what Mr Holele said – I am just raising it for you Mr 
Moodley looms large in these proceedings.  Mr Holele said 
that Mr Moodley said to him, you know, you had better be 
on the right side of history because there is going to be a 
change in the ministry and there is going to be a major 
change at PRASA.  He used the term that has – is going to 
come up again or it certainly came up when we dealt with 
what happened on the 20 August 2015, he says that young 
man is coming back.  Mr Holele saw that has a reference to 
you, are you aware of any of that? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Holele is younger than me, Chair, I do 
not know when there is a young man he assumes it should 
be me.  He is far younger than me, Chair.  So surely I 
thought he would be looking at someone else. 
 
Chair, I do not know, I say Mr Holele’s testimony 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 227 of 362 
 
where he called me a dictator and I have been making the 
statement but I had left PRASA by this time, I think two 
years earlier so I do not have direct knowledge of what 
was discussed in the meeting, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You see, what for the Commission is 
not without significance and I am not saying it is of 
extreme significance is that three months – I mean, three 
weeks after that meeting Ms Dipuo Peters is replaced as 
the minister and I am just saying that as a Commission 
these are not matters we can ignore. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Once that evidence is before us and 
so to the extent that you think Mr Moodley is being focused 
upon, the reason is because there is those pieces of 
evidence as against [indistinct – dropping voice] 
 
Now in paragraph 15 he says that Mr Majola 
conducted the – an investigation into the Prodigy contracts 
and it is a report that is in fact annexed to his affidavit.  Now 
I would just like you to turn to page 128 which deals with the 
report.  I do not want us to look at the whole report but just 
20 
two parts of the report that – or three parts of the report.  If I 
can ask you, the report starts at page 128 and I would like 
you to turn to page 135. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say page 135? 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Page 
135, 
as 
you 
please, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 228 of 362 
 
Chairperson.  In paragraph 5.1 Mr Majola in the report says: 
“There is a number of witnesses who are yet to be 
interviewed and submit statements to this matter.  
From statements obtained it is clear that former 
PRASA technical CEO, Mr Saki Zamxaka’s statement 
would be critical to this matter.” 
What was Mr Zamxaka’s role at PRASA? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Mr Zamxaka, Chair, was the – well, I 
do not know because here he was the CEO of our technical 
division and I assume therefore that the part of the training 
10 
happened with his team, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Part of the training…? 
MR MONTANA:   I am saying that PRASA Technical is one 
of the divisions of PRASA, he was the CEO. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, I see.  [indistinct – dropping 
voice] yes.  Now just relating to Mr Zamxaka, I am going to 
go into something we are going to deal with tomorrow.  One 
of the properties we are investigating is the Parkwood 
property.  In that property there is – there was an addendum 
to the sale – your sale to – that you [indistinct] of that 
20 
property and it is recorded in the addendum that Mr Zamxaka 
was in fact a tenant in that property.  Is that so? 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair, it was my property, he was put 
there by me, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, so he was renting from you? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 229 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Mr Zamxaka, Chair, I do not want to 
discuss his personal matters but for some personal reasons 
he was going through a process and he rented a place in the 
City Centre of Johannesburg, in Pretoria, and I did not even 
know about that, Chair, because he did not tell, it was none 
of my – it had nothing to do with me.  I meant to see him one 
evening, I could not find him and I knew that he lived in 
Pretoria, I was also in Pretoria, and I could only see him the 
following day.  Then he told me and explained, you know, he 
could not come and I realised that we have one of our CEOs 
10 
was actually living in the middle of Johannesburg and I 
identified the risk and then I arranged – I said look, I have 
got a property that I have just developed, if you can stay 
there in the meantime whilst you are trying to sort yourself 
out, Chair.  So there is nothing – it has got nothing to do 
with Mr van der Walt or anything, it was me offering a 
brother a place to stay whilst he was going through a 
particular phase in his life, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Can I ask you now to look at 
paragraph 5.4? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, before we move to there.  Mr Soni, I 
see you are jumping 4.18, 4.18 above.  Can I read it out to 
you: 
“It is evident that former Group CEO Lucky Montana 
was determined to have Prodigy conducting training 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 230 of 362 
 
for PRASA regardless of company policies and 
tendering procedure.” 
Chair, here is a report.  Someone has not even – I have left 
PRASA two earlier, I do not know who this Mr Majola is, he 
has not even interviewed me but he can make that kind of a 
statement.  I mean, these are the type of things they are 
talking about.  He does not know me but he knows that 
Montana is determined.  When I look at the word determined, 
Chair, he does not even mention the fact that he did not 
even interview me, yet he can make the kind of statements 
10 
about me which I think that – I mean, I look at the 
conclusion.  He leave it at that, Chair, it is not even part of 
his conclusion, it is in the body of the report, he makes a 
finding.  So I just wanted to bring that to that thing, it 
happened after I had left PRASA two years later, he never 
interviewed me but – and I will have a problem with a report 
like that, Chair, as a starting point. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And now that – I did not want to 
raise matters relevant to you but can I ask you to look at 
4.15 now that you have raised it?  He says: 
20 
“It is evident from statements obtained that it was 
deliberate not to follow SCM tender process to 
employ services of Prodigy to conduct training for 
PRASA and there would be constant communication 
breakdown between PRASA managers and Prodigy 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 231 of 362 
 
and that is the reason Mr Montana brought Nes 
Konduwe(?) to rescue the process.” 
I am just making the point that he does make some adverse 
– but I did not refer to …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair, I see that and that is what 
conspiracies do, Chair.  When you formulate these things in 
your head and they become – you know, sometimes you 
create this thing, Chair, with your own hand, your own labour 
and it become a fetish, something you start to worship 
because you think it has got power over you, yet you have 
10 
created it, it is product of your own labour.  We are seeing it 
in this report, Chair.   
Ms Konduwe worked for PRASA for a very long time.  
In HR, in fact I think she joined Metro Rail before it was even 
PRASA.  I think she was part of South African Airways, one 
of the highly experienced HR executive or senior managers 
in that environment, so why was she brought in to rescue 
anything?  So you can see, I am not surprised why 4.18 
comes in, Chair, because here is a guy who does not even 
know me.  He has probably never even seen me, he only 
20 
knows my name from reading reports and he decided to right 
something like that.  What was she rescuing?   
You see, Chair, I mentioned earlier on when we were 
dealing with the affidavit of Dingiswayo, that there are 
insinuations, but we are not told what it is.  Now there it is, I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 232 of 362 
 
am saving – I am bringing her to save something.  What is it 
that needs to be saved?  I am asking myself, Chair. 
 
So these are the type of things and unless if this 
chap is asked to elaborate and assist the Commission to 
understand what is he saying in his report?  I think that is 
something that should not be taken lightly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Well I was looking, you commented in 
respect of paragraph 4.18 which you read out.  In regard to 
that paragraph you commented that what you are saying 
there was not even part of his conclusion but then I went 
10 
back to see what heading it falls under.  I see that it falls 
under findings.  So what he is saying there, is a finding.  I 
have not – I do not – I have not read this report recently so 
my memory is not fresh on it but from the markings that I 
have made on it, I think it would have been dealt with earlier 
but I see also that – I see it is a progress report but I see 
that in paragraph 4.2, which is at page 133, it says: 
“It is evident that there was no tender process 
followed to bring Prodigy into the PRASA system for 
the training project and all decisions which were 
20 
made and taken in respect of this project were in 
favour of a service provider.” 
And then under 5, which has the heading Conclusion, 5.1 
says: 
“There is a number of witnesses who are yet to be 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 233 of 362 
 
interviewed and submit statements to this matter.  
From statements obtained it is clear that former 
PRASA Technical CEO Mr Saki Zamxaka’s statement 
would be critical to this matter.” 
5.2: 
“There is a host of documents and records still to be 
retrieved from different offices or employees in order 
to complete this investigation as per the scope.” 
Ja, there are others.  Well, it just – what attracted my 
attention was that the investigation appeared not to be 
10 
completed yet because he said there were still a number of 
statements or witnesses who were still to be interviewed but 
I see that he says a progress report but I was just noting 
that.  Yes, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Then at 
5.4 he says: 
“There is a general feeling from some managers that 
Prodigy training of PRASA employees was not worth 
the money which had been paid to them as it did not 
benefit the business in any way.” 
20 
So that is a view that has been expressed.  You obviously 
hold a different view, you said so at the outset that they 
produced and they improved the business of PRASA, is that 
correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, I do not know, someone who has 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 234 of 362 
 
been 2017, I do not know Majola to what extent he was 
involved with those processes, what he has, what evidence 
he has looked at.  I was just noting, I do not even want to 
comment because I do not know what as the purpose of this 
report but I see attacks on me that are so unjustified that 
know that the basis – but, Chair, I do not want to take up on 
this report, I would just note in picking up points as we are 
speaking, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And then just finally, I want to 
refer you to 5.5 which is – which reiterates what is said I 
10 
think in 4.2 and it reads: 
“Although the investigation process has not been 
completed, it is confirmed through the statements 
obtained that there was no SCM tender process 
followed to employ the services of Prodigy with this 
training programme.” 
MR MONTANA:   I think, Chair, that has been the subject 
of our discussion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the question, as I understand it, 
is whether given the nature of the relationship and the 
contract that ensued, Section 217 and the tender process 
was triggered.  Would that be a fair summary of what we 
have been debating? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 235 of 362 
 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, I think the summary that we 
made earlier on particularly on getting the right information  
to enable to make – to enable the Commission to make an 
informed determination and come to 217.  I think Majola’s 
report, Chair, is – Jabuli Sam Majola, I do not think, Chair, 
is someone who probably was not senior enough or was not 
aware, is an investigator who looks at the – who probably 
wanted to know the facts without looking at the bigger 
picture but I would not dismiss it, I would allow it that we 
can test everything he says. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Once we have obtained that information, 
Chairperson, [indistinct – dropping voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Finally, in regard to Mr Dingiswayo, 
Mr Montana, I just want us to look at paragraph 19.  He 
says: 
“Based on the aforegoing, I submit that PRASA is 
under a duty to press for the setting …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Which page are you on? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh sorry, page 110, back to his 
affidavit, sorry. 
MR MONTANA:   Oh, back to his affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Okay. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 236 of 362 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   110, Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:   I am there, Chair, 110. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right at the bottom, paragraph 19 he 
says: 
“Based on the aforegoing, I submit that PRASA is 
under a duty to press for the setting aside of the 
contracts and resisting Prodigy’s claim for payment 
from PRASA.  I further submit that Prodigy was 
favoured because Mr Roy Moodley exercised such 
undue influence over Mr Montana and other senior 
10 
employees, the support of the manner in which Mr 
Montana ran PRASA for the benefit of certain 
individuals and entities he was close to.” 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think throughout the day I went 
into details to show that Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit, number 
one is based on hearsay but clearly that here is a man who 
is playing politics.  I explained his role how selective he 
was.  Now I would ask a simple practical question.  When 
Prodigy engaged with the Group HR of PRASA, who was 
involved in that discussion and under whose instruction 
20 
were they taking those decisions because then that is what 
clarifies the issue.  But when I look at this, I think it is 
devoid of truth, devoid of fact, it is playing – it is searching 
for Roy Moodley.  I have said in my affidavit that they want 
– they could not find the Guptas at PRASA and they had to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 237 of 362 
 
find a new Gupta and that new Gupta is Roy Moodley.   
 
Chair, I think that I have explained, people had 
thought even Moodley was appointed at PRASA.  He was 
never appointed at PRASA, he was inherited from Transnet 
in 1991 and the very same people who make these kind of 
statements actually recommended, Chair, the list of security 
companies 
that 
needed 
to 
be 
extended 
that 
were 
recommended by the Bid Adjudication Committee, was done 
under the leadership of Tiro Holele and Dingiswayo’s boss, 
Ms Martha Ngoyi.    
10 
Now did they not know Roy Moodley at that time 
when they recommended?  Now suddenly we have got state 
capture, they want to show that Moodley is so powerful.  
There was never a Gupta at PRASA, there was never a 
Moodley that dominated PRASA and I think that a lot of 
people may have their views about PRASA but, Chair, I said 
earlier on during the day – I said firstly, you will never find 
a single project at PRASA that we implemented that we 
spent money on and it was not done, where you say money 
disappeared.  Not a single one, Chair. 
20 
The second thing, Chair, you will not find the Guptas 
but you see, people who investigated PRASA, they thought 
they will find Jacob Zuma and the Guptas at PRASA and 
that is why they are trying to draw – create the links and all 
of those things.  There is none, Chair.  But when you are 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 238 of 362 
 
CEO of an entity like PRASA, there are a lot of interest in 
this business including people who tell us that they are 
biggest fighters against state capture.   
Chair, when I present my evidence, you will actually 
see that the people who have given us lectures in this 
Commission about state capture, were the forefront of the 
destruction of PRASA.  For example, Minister Pravin said in 
his testimony here that one way state capture works is by 
changing boards, changing cabinets and other organs of – 
but that is exactly what they did with PRASA and got it 
10 
where it is, Chair. 
So I think that ultimately you have to be guided by 
the facts, separate facts from fiction and look at these 
issues dispassionately, Chair, and we will find that Mr 
Dingiswayo is running away from the very issue.  She was 
an instrument, Chair, I am not surprised that between his 
affidavit and the affidavit of Mr Molefe, which we dealt with 
on Friday and the affidavit of Martha Ngoyi, the affidavit of 
Tiro Holele, all of these affidavits shows people who were  
actually articulating from the same position but they cannot 
20 
give – my personal knowledge, Chair, I never spoke about – 
I heard somebody saying this, I wanted to focus on facts, on 
evidence that I present to this Commission. 
So, Chair, Mr Dingiswayo, fired him, he was bitter, 
so he will not come here and praise me and say Mr Montana 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 239 of 362 
 
did a good work.  Ms Ngoyi, I removed her as CEO of 
Intersite and I fired her from the business.  So I do not 
expect this – and, Chair, I am not in a beauty contest, I do 
not like the – I have never run an entity where people like 
me.  In fact I love it when 90% of people I have managed do 
not like me and I only have ten.  Ten good quality people 
and we make things happen, Chair. 
So in short, Mr Soni, I do not think Dingiswayo 
seriously and I do not think this affidavit is worth the paper 
written on. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I do not have any other 
matters arising from Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So with regard to Mr Dingiswayo have 
you exhausted…? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I have exhausted everything I want to 
ask, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
so 
tomorrow 
it 
would 
be 
…[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Ngoli(?) and Mr Ollermann’s 
report. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  Okay, we are going 
to adjourn then this day session.  Let us continue tomorrow 
and let us start at half past nine tomorrow as well, if we 
can.  Is that fine, Mr Montana?  Half past nine?  Is fine? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I am in your hands except 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 240 of 362 
 
when we discussed with Mr Soni you said the person who 
is coming was going to be very brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, yes, yes.  Ja, maybe we should 
rather start with him.  Okay, I think we should start with 
him.  I think let us start – resume your evidence at half 
past ten. 
MR MONTANA:   Half past ten. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we are not done with him you might 
have to wait a bit but we should not take too long with him.  
Ja, okay.  We are then adjourning the day session.  I will 
10 
take a ten minutes break and then we will start the evening 
session.  I have been very bad, the staff and technicians, 
they just hear me saying we have an evening session and 
then do not always get to know well in advance.  I am sorry 
about that.  But they have been very good, they have been 
very cooperative and given the Commission the time to do 
its work in the evening.  I will ask the secretary to be in 
touch with them so that where there may be some 
challenges we can see how we can sort those out.  I am 
hoping that this evening it would still be fine but if there 
20 
are challenges in terms of [word cut] and that without 
whom we cannot proceed, they must just let us know in due 
course, the – I will ask the Secretary of the Commission to 
be in touch with everybody but I will take – we will take a 
ten minute adjournment and then we will – I will come back 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 241 of 362 
 
and then we start with the evening session.   I have in 
mind that we would go at least up to eight but if there’s 
nobody who is complaining we might go to nine o’clock but 
I think that there are a lot of people here who are very 
committed to the work of the Commission.   I will take a ten 
minute adjournment. 
ADV VAS SONI:   Chairperson may the PRASA team be 
excused. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you are excused. 
ADV VAS SONI:   As you wish. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Pretorius, good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Good afternoon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes we are ready to lead the 
witness, Dr Isaac Dintwe, but there an application before 
you and I presume those would want to ask you firstly to 
20 
hear the application and if you are going to hear it Chair to 
address you on it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well this application I was told about 
last night, I have not read it, why should I hear it now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well perhaps the ...[intervenes]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 242 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you might not be the right person to 
ask. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am not the right person to ask, 
we have our own views, it is late. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, who is the right person?   I haven’t 
even authorised that he should be before me now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Judge perhaps I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s leave that part.   Who is here? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am being collegial Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, who is here? 
10 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Good afternoon Chair, my name is 
Tshidiso Ramogale, I appear on behalf of Lt General Peter 
Jacobs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   And we have brought the application 
that the Chairperson is referring to, and I am not sure by 
way of procedure whether you would want us to move the 
application and to provide our reasons for why the 
application is late, but we are in the Chairperson’s hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I haven’t read it in the first 
20 
place, why should it be dealt with now before I hear Dr 
Dintwe’s evidence? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Well Chairperson our view is that the 
application need not be heard today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 243 of 362 
 
ADV RAMOGALE:   The – provided of course that the 
relevant parts of the application which we have brought, in 
essence an application to strike out certain paragraphs 
from Dr Dintwe’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why must they be struck out? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   The grounds are irrelevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but that is none of your business, 
that is the Commission’s business, if the Commission 
admits them as irrelevant it does not hurt you so why is 
that your business.   It would be different if they hurt you, 
10 
they infringe your rights, your client’s rights, but that they 
are irrelevant this is not litigation where you are a party, 
this is an inquiry. 
ADV RAMOGALE:  Yes, no Chairperson that is correct that 
this is an inquiry but we are entitled if the Commission is 
being drawn to facts that are not within its purview. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   To be objecting as such. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, if they don’t infringe your rights, 
your client’s rights, it is just that they are irrelevant I don’t 
20 
see why that should be your business, that is what I am 
saying.   It is different if you say they infringe your client’s 
rights. 
ADV RAMOGALE:  Well no Chairperson the argument we 
make is the test as the Chairperson is well aware of is one 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 244 of 362 
 
of prejudice and the scope of prejudice is quite wide, it is 
not necessarily that a person has to be directly adversely 
affected by the allegations and what we say is that the 
allegations made in the affidavit are in fact damning before 
we even make our submissions on whether they are true or 
not we say that they are irrelevant to the Commission’s 
mandate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, when did you get the – Dr Dintwe’s 
affidavit? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   We got the notice on the 29 t h of March, 
10 
we set out our reasons, I appreciate that the Chairperson 
has not read the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I am looking at the time, if you 
got it on the 29 t h of March that means today is what – the 
20 t h? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then I see that it was signed on the 19 t h 
of April the Notice of Motion so where were you for three 
weeks? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   So we set out our reasons when 
20 
General Jacobs was implicated, because he was implicated 
in his official capacity as Divisional Commissioner, we had 
to make an application for funding from the National 
Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 245 of 362 
 
ADV RAMOGALE:   And that is what held us back, that is 
the first reason.  The second reason we have advanced is 
that the time General Jacobs was away on annual, on paid 
leave, and he couldn’t cancel and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He was away on? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   On annual leave, the arrangements 
had already been made and he had already paid for the trip 
with his family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he went on leave instead of 
preparing his application? 
10 
ADV RAMOGALE:   No Chairperson, I will go to the other 
reasons.   When it became clear that he would not be able 
to submit his affidavit within fourteen days we made a 
request to the Commission, we wrote a letter to the 
Commission’s Secretary and we were informed that the 
Commission 
is 
not 
in 
a 
position 
to 
grant 
or 
deny 
applications and that the application would have to be 
moved with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in the end apart from saying that 
certain allegations are  irrelevant what else is your – what 
20 
other complaints do you have about the allegations to 
which you are objecting? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   No that is it, the only – we give a full 
answer to the allegations but the only grounds on which we 
bring this ...[indistinct] is that we say that they are 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 246 of 362 
 
irrelevant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no that is fine.  I don’t think 
that that should be something that should hold up me 
hearing the evidence, you will be able to deal with the 
allegations in terms of whether they are true or not, I think 
that is the important thing.   As Dr Dintwe gives evidence if 
there is something that I consider irrelevant I will deal with 
it as we go along and Mr Pretorius will also be aware of 
that, and – but that is not something that should hold up 
the hearing of his evidence. 
10 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Chairperson might understand that 
application 
has 
been 
denied, 
our 
application 
to 
...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I am inclined to do, based 
on what you have said so far, that is what I would like to 
do, is there any reason why you think I should not do that. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Oh well we have provided our reason, I 
just wanted to be clear for the record that our application 
has been denied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   
20 
ADV RAMOGALE:   The added application that we have 
brought Chair is to – as I understand the rules require us 
to bring an application for leave to produce evidence which 
we have done in the same application. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
You 
have 
done 
it 
in 
the 
same 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 247 of 362 
 
application? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   We have done it in the same 
application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that would be different, applying 
for leave to adduce evidence or applying for leave for 
cross-examine that would not be different, but that can be 
dealt with after. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Yes Chair.   The only thing I wish to 
point the Chairperson to is that there is no specific prayer 
in our Notice of Motion for leave and at the appropriate 
10 
time I will move the application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes well in fact even on the question of 
relevance if you -  I mean from what you are saying you 
really were mentioning the issue of relevance but you 
apply for leave to adduce evidence? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   In addition to that yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and you also apply for leave to 
cross-examine or not? 
ADV RAMOGALE:   No, no we reserve our right in that 
respect depending on what the testimony is. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   But it is a threefold application, 
condonation for the late filing, an application to strike out 
as well as an application for leave to give evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what I will say is I do not think 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 248 of 362 
 
there is a warrant to deal with it now, okay.   If you later on 
after today wish to indicate what you insist you want a 
decision on other than your application for leave to adduce 
evidence you must write to the Secretary and indicate and 
then – because obviously that can be dealt with but it does 
not have to be dealt with now. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   Sorry Chair, I am a little bit confused 
now, so is there no decision on the application or 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I am saying I am not going to 
10 
need to deal with it now, okay, the application for leave to 
adduce evidence I can deal with that later, we don’t have 
to deal with that now, if there is any other thing that you 
want a decision on in regard to this application other than 
the application for leave to adduce evidence you must let 
me know in due course through the Secretary, but there is 
no need to deal with it now. 
ADV RAMOGALE:   No I understand, thank you very much 
for your time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  Yes Mr Pretorius? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC: Chair the witness before you is Dr 
Setlhomamaru Isaac Dintwe.  May he be sworn. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Please 
administer 
the 
oath 
or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 249 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   Setlhomamaru Isaac Dintwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you are going to take off your mask 
when you give evidence you may as well take it off now. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
DR DINTWE:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry you just have to speak up so 
your answers can be recorded. 
10 
DR DINTWE:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Registrar you are whispering to me.    
REGISTRAR:   Should I start over Judge? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you don’t have to start from the 
beginning if his earlier answers were audible but if you are 
not sure then start from the beginning, if you are not sure, 
if you are sure that they were audible it is fine. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so 
help me God. 
DR DINTWE:   So help me God. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 250 of 362 
 
SETLHOMAMARU ISAAC DINTWE:  [d.s.s] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may be seated Dr 
Dintwe.  Thank you very much Dr Dintwe for availing 
yourself to assist the Commission, we appreciate that very 
much. 
 
Yes Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair you have 
before you a bundle, Bundle SSA2B.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In that bundle are three exhibits 
10 
and the statement of Dr Dintwe is Exhibit YY15. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I will ask that it be admitted in due 
course.  Dr Dintwe do you have Exhibit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Pretorius, I just picked up 
something here and maybe you are aware of it, the – Dr 
Dintwe’s affidavit in this file appears at the end, and I see 
that I cannot see any annexures to it, and yet I understand 
that his affidavit has got annexures. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair I will explain the 
20 
position with regard to annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Dr Dintwe do you have Exhibit 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 251 of 362 
 
YY15 before you? 
DR DINTWE:   I do have. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you go please to page, and 
these are the black numbers in the top left hand corner, 
SSA2775, we will just be referring to the last three 
numbers, but always the black numbers on the top left 
hand corner, do you see SSA2775? 
DR DINTWE:   I can see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that the first page of your 
affidavit? 
10 
DR DINTWE:    That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please go to page 835, that is the 
last page. 
DR DINTWE:   I am on that page.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes whose signature is that above 
the name Isaac Dintwe, Setlhomamaru Isaac Dintwe? 
DR DINTWE:   I confirm it is my signature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Your signature, are you satisfied 
that the contents of this affidavit insofar as you are aware 
are true and correct? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   I can certify that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There are no annexures to this 
affidavit as the Chair has pointed out, we will explain in 
due course, but there are indeed intended to be annexures, 
certain of those documents need to be declassified, either 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 252 of 362 
 
by yourself or by the State Security Agency or another 
appropriate instance and that process is still underway? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, I can confirm that 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    And in due course you may return 
to identify the relevant documents?   
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairman. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Dr Dintwe you are at present the 
Inspector General of Intelligence? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Pretorius.   You request me 
10 
to admit his affidavit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As an exhibit?  It would be Exhibit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   YY15. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
YY15. 
 
And 
the 
affidavit 
of 
Dr 
Setlhomamaru Isaac Dintwe starting at page 75 is admitted 
as an exhibit and will be marked as Exhibit YY15. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Dr Dintwe - may I 
proceed?  Thank you Chair.   Dr Dintwe you are the 
Inspector General of Intelligence, is that correct? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When were you appointed, by the 
President? 
DR DINTWE:   With effect from the 15 t h of March 2017. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in terms of which piece of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 253 of 362 
 
legislation were you appointed? 
DR DINTWE:   The Intelligence Services Act and the 
Oversight Act Number 40 of 1994. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
We 
will 
refer 
to 
that 
as 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   One second.   Yes Mr Pretorius you may 
proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Before we deal with the contents of 
your affidavit perhaps by way of certain preliminary 
remarks we can inform the Chair why you are here to give 
10 
evidence and in summary what topics you are going to 
cover.   
 
You are aware of the fact that certain evidence has 
already been given by or on behalf of members of the State 
Security Agency. 
DR DINTWE:   I am aware of that Chairperson, I do confirm 
but I will only be dealing with some of the other evidence 
that was not adduced. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in accordance with the 
Constitution the State Security Agency is subject to civilian 
20 
oversight, correct.    
DR DINTWE:   Yes, but Section 210 you know want to 
cover the whole of the Security apparatus of the country 
and will go beyond the State Security Agency to also cover 
Crime Intelligence which is a division of the South African 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 254 of 362 
 
Police Services, it will also cover the Defence Intelligence 
which is just a division in the South African National 
Defence Force.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the three arms of State 
Security, 
Intelligence, 
Crime 
Intelligence 
and 
State 
Security Agency fall within your oversight purview? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you are currently in office as 
the Inspector General of Intelligence, performing that 
oversight mechanism? 
10 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now you will deal I understand it 
with the nature and functioning of the Office of the IGI, the 
Chair is concerned in this and other fields with the 
question of oversight and your evidence will deal with two 
aspects in regard to that oversight, as I understand it 
firstly aspects relating to the independent of the Office of 
the IGI? 
DR DINTWE:    That is correct Chairperson.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And secondly the powers of the 
20 
IGI. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then you will deal with a 
number of factual issues relating to your office, its 
independence, its hours and how these are dealt with by 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 255 of 362 
 
other statutory bodies or officials. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You will also I understand deal with 
matters relating to the operational relationship between the 
office of the IGI, the relevant Minister and State Security, 
the State Security Agency and other security instances. 
DR DINTWE:   I will also deal with that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Relevant to the information that 
you are going to place before the Chair and certainly will 
place before the Chair when the declassification process 
10 
has been concluded, both on your part and the part of the 
SSA, is Section 78A of the Oversight Act, you deal with 
that in paragraph 4 of your statement, what does that 
provide? 
DR DINTWE:   Alright, now Chairperson I have to be 
careful here because there is a thin line between the two 
processes that I am going to explain here.  The first one is 
the provisions of Section 78 which talks about before any 
disclosure, to any institution or organisation outside of IGI 
I am required to consult with the State President and they 
20 
say relevant Minister, so if it is the information which only 
deals with the State Security Agency it will be only that 
Minister but in this instance, because I am dealing with 
information 
which 
cover 
across 
the 
three 
different 
intelligence 
services 
I 
had 
to 
consult 
with 
four 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 256 of 362 
 
functionaries, which will be the State President and the 
three Ministers; Minister of Police, Minister of Defence and 
Military Deterrence as well as Minister of State Security. 
 
Now once that process is concluded then we get to 
the other one which then deals with the declassification of 
information and I do get my powers to declassify from the 
Minimum 
Information 
Security 
Standard 
or 
the 
MISS 
document, which then says that the documents can be 
classified, reclassified or declassified by the originator, in 
other words the author or the owner of those documents.   
10 
 
So in the Office of Inspector General of Intelligence 
you will get different documents, you will get those that I 
would 
have 
produced 
as 
the 
Inspector 
General 
of 
Intelligence but you will also get those that I would have 
requested from different services, so which means that 
then I cannot declassify those, but I can declassify only 
those that I have ownership of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the – if you could clarify this for 
me, what is the source of the power to make that document 
called MISS?  What is the – is there a provision in some 
20 
law that says so and so may make this document? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, the position of our office and I think 
the other stakeholders that I would have discussed this is 
that in fact it is a binding document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 257 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   It is a binding document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but what I want to find out is what 
makes it binding and is it binding only internally within the 
Security bodies or is it something that has – does it have 
legal force, is it a regulation, supporting legislation, is it 
just a document that reflects cabinet’s decision or that 
reflects the President’s decision or that reflects a certain 
Minister ’s decision or a certain group of – a decision of a 
certain group of Ministers because there has been a lot of 
reference to it in the past as well but I have never heard 
10 
exactly whether it is a regulation that is made under the 
Oversight Act that you referred to, or where the power 
comes from to make that document? 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, it started off as a cabinet resolution or a 
cabinet decision and then it was used across government 
because there could be some information that needs to be 
classified and that does not necessarily belong to the 
Intelligent Services, even the Cabinet Ministers themselves 
they are classified so this will be a reference document, 
but what enhanced its powers or what made it more 
20 
stronger was the decision of Justice Museneke on the 
matter of Ms Papier, on Ms Papier ’s decision and since 
after 
that 
the 
Constitutional 
Court 
developed 
some 
guidelines 
and 
those 
guidelines 
were 
based 
on 
the 
provisions of MISS document, so from where I am sitting 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 258 of 362 
 
Chairperson I will say that it is an enforceable document, it 
is also a binding document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well unless the Constitutional Court – 
unless the Constitutional Court in its decision said that this 
document is binding and then I assume indicated on whom 
it is binding, I am not sure that you are right because if it 
just assumed that it has legal force because it wasn’t 
necessary for it to decide in that particular case whether 
the document had a legal force that might be a different 
thing, but I assume from what you are saying that you are 
10 
saying to me you do not know whether it has any legal 
force or not but up to now everybody treats it as if it has 
legal force and when I say legal force I am thinking about 
if it is not part of legislation then it must be regulations or 
if somewhere there is provision to say such a document 
may be made, and it says who makes that document and 
under – for what purpose you know then one would trace 
the origin of the ultimate power or the source of the power 
for it, but if it was – it is simply somebody’s decision no 
matter who that person is who just decided it would be 
20 
good that we should have a document that sets out A, B, C, 
D and that document was prepared and it may be it does 
have a good purpose because there needs to be guideline 
but sometimes you need to know does this document, is it 
just a document of convenience that does not have legal 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 259 of 362 
 
force or is it a document that has legal force, so that is 
why I was asking, but I think you are saying, one, it started 
as you understand as a document that reflected cabinet 
decision and then there was the case that went to the 
Control Court and you say arising subsequent to that you 
understand it to be taken to the finding and that’s all you 
are able to say. 
DR DINTWE:   And perhaps Chairperson to say that debate 
is still ongoing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh there is such a debate? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, there is such a debate and maybe what I 
was providing to you is the position of the Office of the 
Inspector General of Intelligence because if it is ongoing 
then we also have a particular position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And it is not surprising that as a person who 
monitors compliance I would like to have a particular 
framework which will assist me so that I can go to people 
and say that why did you classify this one, why didn’t you 
declassify this one when that information is required, 
20 
especially for prosecution, so I think that we will have our 
own bias, if you like, as an oversight body. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   To say that the way it is drafted it can at 
least take us somewhere in an absence of another legal 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 260 of 362 
 
framework ...[indistinct] with classification/declassification 
as well reclassification, so the debate is ongoing.   In fact 
we have some minutes somewhere which also reflect that 
we have been meeting with the ...[indistinct] and really 
dealing with these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that is fine, I was asking 
because in the context of the evidence relating to IPID 
there was a lot of reference to it when there was the issue 
of IPID witnesses were saying the police were refusing to 
declassify 
documents 
that 
IPID 
needed 
for 
their 
10 
investigations and in your affidavit I know that you referred 
to that as well and they were – there was this reference to 
this document and it seemed to be difficult to get also so – 
okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we will address the issue in 
due course from our point of view Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  One question in that regard.  This 
document, is it classified?   
MR DINTWE:  It is not a classified document.  This is not 
20 
classified.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Not classified.  We know it is in the 
public domain. 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  In paragraph 4 of your 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 261 of 362 
 
affidavit Dr Dintwe, you refer to Section 7(8)B as being the 
origin of the duty to consult.  Sorry, you refer to 7(8)A of, 
as the section providing the duty to consult.  If I may just 
refer you to 7(8)B of the Oversight Act.  
 
It is in the bundle of legislation in front of you.  
Chair, you should have that bundle.  At page 129.  We just 
need to clarify disclosure and declassification and how 
they work with one another or do not work with one 
another.  
 
Section 7 deals with the appointment, hours and 
10 
duties of the inspector general.  You see that? 
MR DINTWE:  I see that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Section 7(8)B says that: 
 
“Notwithstanding 
anything 
to 
the 
contrary 
contained in this or any other law or the 
common law, the inspector general ...” 
 
And if we go to B: 
 
“May, 
if 
the 
intelligence 
or 
information 
received by him or her in terms of paragraph A 
is subject to any restriction in terms of any 
20 
law, disclose that only (i) after consultation 
with the president and the minister responsible 
for the service in question, and (ii) subject to 
appropriate 
restrictions 
placed 
on 
such 
intelligence or information by the inspector 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 262 of 362 
 
general if necessary and (iii) to the extent that 
such disclosure is not detrimental to the 
national interest.” 
 
And it is instructive that the words national interest 
are used, not state interest but that is something that we 
will deal with in due course.  The point is that you have 
information and you have documentary information which 
you wish to disclose to the Chair.  
 
The 
process 
enjoined 
by 
Section 
7(8)B, 
the 
consultation process, that is complete as you will tell the 
10 
Chair in a moment in sub paragraph 4 of your affidavit or 
paragraph 4 of your affidavit, but it is the further steps that 
I want to highlight for the moment.  
 
You may then make a decision with regard to the 
restrictions you placed on the information that you wish 
now to disclose and you are in the process of doing that.   
MR DINTWE:  I confirm that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you will consider the provisions 
of the section, apply them and in due course produce the 
documents, subject to whatever restrictions you may deem 
20 
necessary.  
MR DINTWE:  That is the correct arrangement with the 
legal team Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That will allow you to disclose to 
the Chair if there is a document that is never the less 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 263 of 362 
 
classified, at the hands of another state entity for example 
the SSA, before it is made public the classification would 
never the less be necessary.  
 
That is as we understand the position. 
MR DINTWE:  That is my understanding also Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  So Chair, there are two 
processes that must be dealt with in the compilation of the 
annexures.  The first is the disclosure to yourself of the 
documentary evidence, and the second is to the extent that 
it is declassified.  
10 
 
We will approach the authorities for the appropriate 
declassification.  If the classification is not forthcoming, 
then it will only be you who has access to the documents.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So has there been a consultation 
process Dr Dintwe? 
MR DINTWE:  I can confirm that we have completed that 
process Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And was it successfully completed? 
MR 
DINTWE: 
 
It 
was 
successfully 
completed, 
20 
notwithstanding with difficulty, I should mention. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, and have you received any 
confirmation 
from 
the 
president that the 
consultative 
process has been completed? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson.  There is a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 264 of 362 
 
letter from the president confirming that.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the wording of the section is 
instructive.  You may make your decisions regarding 
disclosure as stated in the section after consultation, not 
in consultation, as I understand the law in that regard it 
means that the decision ultimately is your decision. 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson, that is our 
understanding and interpretation of the OIG. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was that consultative process an 
easy process? 
10 
MR DINTWE:  Not at all Chairperson.  It was a very 
difficult one.  There were letters in fact that would have 
been written to the commission which could indicate to the 
commission that it was a to and fro kind of process.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  A complaint was lodged 
against you in relation to your providing information to the 
commission.  What was that complaint and who made the 
complaint? 
MR DINTWE:  Alright.  Now the complaint came at the time 
that I was expecting their inputs because the way the 
20 
consultation was done, is that I provided the three 
ministers and the president with the bundle, full bundle and 
say that I am intending to disclose this information to the 
commission and I am trying to comply with 7(8)A and B.  
 
Now those documents were gone for about two 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 265 of 362 
 
weeks or three weeks, and there was an agreement 
because we were under pressure of time, a serious one 
and the president directed a particular date.  On that date 
instead of me getting the inputs, I then received three 
bound documents.  
 
They were under the cover of a letter from the 
president.  The president was informing me that he 
received complaints from the three ministers.  Now Minister 
Bheki Cele would have written his own complaint.  Minister 
Nosiwe Mabisang Mapula would have written hers and 
10 
Minister Yanda Dlodlo would have written hers as well.  
 
But there was a serious commonality between them.  
Complaint number one was that I disclosed information to 
the 
commission 
before 
I 
consulted, 
and 
the 
recommendation that they were making to the president 
was that I should be suspended, and obviously be removed 
from this position on the basis of incompetence I think they 
were referring to that.  
 
But I received it on the day that I was expecting the 
inputs.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So the fact that you had 
engaged ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you mentioned ... I thought you 
said there were three complaints or something like that.  
MR DINTWE:  Yes, there were three complaints. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 266 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or is it, was it a complaint about the 
same 
conduct 
on 
your 
part, 
but 
coming 
from 
three 
ministers.  Were they complaining about the same thing? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct.  Maybe I should not have 
said complaints.  I should have said there were three 
documents.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, yes okay. 
MR DINTWE:  With three different authors, but the content 
... ja, the allegations made against me was similar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the same? 
10 
MR DINTWE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay alright.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It was the one that you mentioned?  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the allegation ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  He nodded but that will not be recorded.  
The 
allegation 
that 
was 
being 
made 
in 
the 
three 
documents, was the allegation that you have told me 
20 
about, namely that you disclosed certain information to the 
commission before the consultation process.  
MR DINTWE:  Yes Chairperson, but maybe I should have 
told you that they were in one document they were four, in 
the other one they were three.  Like in the annexures you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 267 of 362 
 
will 
see, 
so 
it 
will 
be 
three 
different 
allegations 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR DINTWE:  Coming from Minister Bheki Cele for 
instance.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR DINTWE:  But complaint number one will be the 
disclosure to this commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Okay. 
MR DINTWE:  I do not mind mentioning the other two.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR DINTWE:  That were also common. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, if they are not important or 
relevant, that is fine.  
MR DINTWE:  Ja, I do not think they are relevant here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MR DINTWE:  Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So the letter that you received 
mentioned 
a 
recommendation 
that 
you 
should 
be 
suspended.  Did the, or those ... the recommendation that 
20 
you should be suspended was contained in the complaint 
by the three ministers, am I correct? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You then received a letter from the 
president.  What did he say to you in that letter? 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 268 of 362 
 
MR DINTWE:  He was informing me that he received those 
complaints, that he was attaching them and that he 
referred that complaint to the joint state committee on 
intelligence, and that he hopes that they will give me audi 
and with regard to the issue of suspension, he said that it 
will depend on the recommendation of the committee, the 
JSCI. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Joint Standing Committee on 
Intelligence, the parliamentary ...[intervenes]  
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chair.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Joint Standard Committee on 
Intelligence.  
MR DINTWE:  Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, and all this was happening at 
the time you were seeking to consult with the ministers 
about your engagement or further engagement with the 
commission. 
MR 
DINTWE: 
 
That 
is 
correct, 
I 
do 
confirm 
that 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you appear before the joint 
20 
standing committee of intelligence? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct.  I went, I was called.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what was the outcome of that 
process? 
MR DINTWE:  When I was starting to explain to them and 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 269 of 362 
 
my starting point, my opening point was to say that if this 
is an inquiry in terms of the Oversight Act, I think that you 
should have informed me in the letter so that I can also 
seek legal representation or, and then they told me that no, 
no, no we decided not to start an inquiry in terms of this 
particular issue.  
 
In fact, they also informed me that they missed 
sending me a letter that they sent back to the president.  
So they would have responded to the president already, 
and they only said that they wanted to only hear the side of 
10 
my story, but it did not go any far, because it became a 
moot point.  
 
On the basis that the [indistinct] Committee on 
Intelligence was saying two things.  The first one was to 
say that the allegations against me were unsubstantiated 
from the three ministers, but secondly that there were no 
rules of parliament which deals with the removal of the 
inspector general of intelligence.  
 
So the Chairperson of the committee was saying I 
cannot start this particular process, because we are still 
20 
behind and we still have to deal with that particular issue.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event, has that matter now 
been put to rest? 
MR DINTWE:  The matter has been put to rest now but not 
entirely.  When the minister of security receive the 33 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 270 of 362 
 
notices, she wrote again to the committee asking them how 
far are you with this complaint.  So she repeated the very 
same complaint again, and asked just ... and then she also 
attached the Rule 33 notice from this commission as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay, alright.  So that is where that 
is for the moment.  Paragraph 6, you talk of an attempt 
was made to pursued you to limit your evidence.  Would 
you just tell the Chair about that please?   
MR DINTWE:  Yes.  So in a meeting which was held 
between myself and the three ministers, which was a very 
10 
hostile meeting I should also add and in the absence of the 
president, they requested me to give them the letter written 
to me by the secretary of the commission. 
 
Now in that letter normally they will just say that 
you are being mentioned.  I was, the office was mentioned 
by the likes of ambassador Moshe, Mr Matletuka, Mr 
Gibson Ngenge.   
 
So the secretary who would have written to say that 
we thing that you can come and close some of the gaps 
that we have in the evidence that was given, you know 
20 
taking 
into 
consideration 
the 
position 
that 
you 
are 
occupying, but if that letter, there were only three points 
that were mentioned there.  
 
The information that was required, would be that I 
should assist the commission in terms of the oversight 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 271 of 362 
 
powers of the OIGI but also tell them my predecessors as 
well as the ministers, that we are actually working at the 
time of those ... of my predecessors, but then you would 
get a sentence which will say and any other information 
that you think will assist the commission. 
 
So in that meeting the ministers were really fixated 
on an issue to say that but the commission has told you 
what they require from you, and I was telling them that no, 
no but the commission will not waste time for me to go 
there and present the Oversight Act.  
10 
 
It is in the public domain, they can just get that they 
have got researchers and so forth.  So I said that no, no, 
no they wanted certain, any other information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Any other information, yes.  
MR DINTWE:  And it stood there, it did not end there 
Chairperson.  The commission would have received a letter 
in an arch file where Mr [indistinct] decided to act on my 
behalf, as an independent office, act on my behalf to send 
to the commission the regulations, the Oversight Act.  
 
So those copies and the letter was addressed to the 
20 
Chairperson to say that we are assisting Dr Dintwe here, 
because it will seem as if he wants to give you more than 
you required.  So that letter is also in my bundle.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, that letter is a matter of 
record, Chair.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 272 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, hang on Dr Dintwe.  I do remember 
that I have previously seen a file that has got the 
legislation and I think regulations and whatever, but I 
cannot remember the background.  I would have assumed 
that I got it just from the legal team, but as you speak I 
now think that there was a file that would have seem to 
come direct from outside the commission that had just that, 
but I have no recollection of whether it had a covering 
letter, and if it had a covering letter what the covering 
letter was saying.  
10 
 
Are you saying that whatever was sent, you did 
see?   
MR DINTWE:  I was copied Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You can refresh my memory. 
MR DINTWE:  Ja, I was addressee B, if you like CC the 
president.  The president was CC, the other two ministers 
were CC’d.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR DINTWE:  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It was coming from which minister? 
20 
MR DINTWE:  Minister Yanda Dlodlo of the state security. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR DINTWE:  And the crux of that letter, it will be 
somewhere Advocate Pretorius.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 273 of 362 
 
MR DINTWE:  The crux of the letter is to say that the 
commission has requested Dr Dintwe to provide information 
with regard to these three points.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR DINTWE:  Who was the inspector general in this year, 
who was the minister during this particular period, and the 
legislation, the oversight and so forth.  So she decided to 
compile it and really demonstrate to myself that it is 
doable, because I was refusing to do it the way she wanted 
it to be done.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thanks Chair, we will put together 
that correspondence.  It is already in the bundle Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
That 
correspondence 
was 
addressed to yourself.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I would like to see it, now knowing this 
context which I did not know before.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  So but is the position that 
as far as you understand, what prompted the sending of 
that file  by Minister Dlodlo was that you seemed to be, 
you seemed not to be keen to send just that.  you wanted 
to give the commission more or you thought you seem to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 274 of 362 
 
indicate to them that it was impossible to just give them 
the commission [indistinct]. 
 
It is just that it is interesting.  
MR DINTWE:  It was my intention and I you know, I 
expressed to them clearly to say that I am a person on my 
own right.  I am an adult.  I am an official of government, 
so obviously I have to write an affidavit and that affidavit 
cannot be based on the letter that was actually written to 
myself.  
 
It was based on the brainstorming session.  So the 
10 
accusation that I would have disclosed information to the 
commission, prior to the consultation process, it is because 
I 
would 
have 
sat 
with 
the 
investigators 
from 
the 
commission, and we will just have a discussion just to see 
which points the commission will have an interest on.  
 
So it was based on that.  So I had an idea already 
of how my affidavit was going to look like.  So I was saying 
that my affidavit will have to be accompanied by these 
annexures, and that is the reason why I am then consulting 
with yourselves.  
20 
 
So I was telling them that as much as I would have 
loved to only send this information, I have made a 
commitment [indistinct] on the brainstorm session that I 
will be able to share information on these other aspects 
which were not necessarily in the letter.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 275 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So to summarise in so far as there 
was a suggestion or a directive or however you want to 
phrase it that you should limit your evidence before the 
commission or your disclosures before the commission, you 
have decided what to say and the extent to which 
information should be disclosed.  
MR DINTWE:  I have decided that Chairperson, and it is a 
critical point because it talks to intelligence of the office of 
the 
inspector 
general 
of 
intelligence, 
but 
it 
also 
10 
demonstrates how the office has been attacked from time 
to time.  
 
You can imagine, I mean if I have to deal with 
certain allegations which are unsubstantiated, it takes 
about five days out of my work to only go and deal with 
those complaints.  So even this one will demonstrate that 
point I think when you go to independence.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, because the duties and 
powers of the inspector general are embedded in the 
constitution and in legislation, it is necessary for us briefly 
20 
to go through the framework which governs your office.  It 
is also relevant to the Chair, because the Chair is 
concerned about the oversight activities, their successes 
of failures in relation to the various aspects of evidence 
that 
we 
have 
heard 
and 
particularly 
the 
evidence 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 276 of 362 
 
emanating from state security agency witnesses.  
 
Paragraph 7, you refer to Section 210 of the 
Constitution.  You see that? 
MR DINTWE:  I see that Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And sub B of that section reads 
that: 
 
“National legislation must provide for civilian 
monitoring of the activities of those services 
...” 
 
Those are intelligent services: 
10 
 
“By an inspector appointed by the president as 
head of the national executive, and approved 
by 
a 
resolution 
adopted 
by 
the 
national 
assembly with a supporting vote of at least two 
thirds of its members.” 
 
So is it correct that in terms of Section 210 of the 
constitution, you were appointed by the president and that 
appointment was approved by parliament in the National 
Assembly with the supporting vote of at least two thirds of 
its members? 
20 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, and the Oversight Act also 
provides for another oversight body.  What is that?   
MR DINTWE:  It provides for the Joint Standing Committee 
on Intelligence.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 277 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, and to whom are you 
accountable in terms of the legislative framework?   
MR DINTWE:  The Oversight Act says that the inspector 
general of intelligence shall be functionally accountable to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR DINTWE:  Power 19 in other words.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, now ...[intervenes]  
MR 
DINTWE: 
 
So 
the 
Joint 
Standing 
Committee 
of 
Intelligence Chairperson, will be like a portfolio committee, 
10 
but they did not ... they just did not want to call it a 
portfolio committee, because this one will deal with 
defence, will deal with the police, will also deal with the 
state security agency.  
 
It will also deal with what we call the interception 
judge.  So they also report there.  Sometimes they even 
call the auditor general of South Africa to come there.  
That is why they could join instead of just the portfolio 
committee.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, so joint committee and not 
20 
just a portfolio committee? 
MR DINTWE:  I think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  They perform the same function as a 
portfolio committee, but it under it various departments? 
MR DINTWE:  Departments, yes Chairperson. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 278 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know, for ja.  
MR DINTWE:  And then it is the only committee of 
parliament that conducts its business behind closed doors.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  
MR DINTWE:  I think that is the one significant difference.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now you have said that you were 
responsible or accountable as IGI to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Intelligence, and not to any other instance.  
I presume that includes the minister? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But in your evidence and certainly 
in the submissions and summaries we will put before you 
Chair, we will show that the legislation is far from clear, 
and there are anomalies in the legislation and certainly in 
the way the legislation is interpreted and applied, that 
below the lines of accountability, below at the very least.   
 
Am I correct in that observation and we will deal 
with that in due course?   
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And one of the considerations in 
20 
relation to independent oversight, is to look at the 
legislation and we will address you and the report in due 
course in that regard Chair.  But in paragraph 9 you deal 
with the details of your appointment, and you have told the 
Chair of that.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 279 of 362 
 
 
You say you were appointed by the President and 
the National Assembly passed the resolution for your 
appointment on the 29 t h of November 2016.   
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say it was passed by 
significantly more than the two thirds majority required by 
the constitution.  Is that correct? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson.  
ADV PRETORIUS 
SC:  And the implications of the 
requirement that parliament by two thirds majority must 
10 
approve your appointment, are clear.  Your appointment is 
at the highest level, of the executive and parliament? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson.  I think that one 
can also even draw a comparison between the inspector 
general of intelligence and the public protector.  The other 
one will be a simple majority I think.   
 
50 plus one.  This one is a two third. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, and then you say and you 
will deal with this in more detail later, in the last sentence 
of paragraph 9.  What the position was preceding your 
20 
appointment.   
MR DINTWE:  That office does not have inspector general 
of intelligence for a period of 22 months.  This was 
occasioned by this voting.  So there were interviews, two 
interviews if my memory serves me well, and in each case 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 280 of 362 
 
the interviewing panel which is the parliamentarians, the 
members of the committee, would have recommended 
somebody.  
 
But every time they went to a national assembly, 
they could not gather necessary majority.  So you know, it 
will then fall by its way side and then the second one came 
again 
until 
I 
got 
appointed, 
but 
for 
22 
months 
my 
predecessor had left that particular office.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Is that a good thing, a bad 
thing?   
10 
MR DINTWE:  It is not only a bad thing, it is actually a 
dangerous thing because I mean, even if you are reading 
literature, sometimes you will really struggle to fathom 
what the intelligence services are doing.  Not even in our 
jurisdiction, but you cannot really sit with intelligent 
services that go unchecked.  
 
If certain things even happened in this country, in 
the existence of the inspector general of intelligence of the 
office itself at least, you would then realise how important 
the existence of such office is and how dangerous it can 
20 
actually be if they go, they go unchecked.  
 
Because this office Honourable Chair, it then it 
becomes like IPID, but only I sometimes say in a simplified 
manner one can say that it is the public protector of the 
intelligence services, because if you look at what we do, 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 281 of 362 
 
like 
we 
investigate 
maladministration, 
corruption, 
compliance 
with 
the 
constitution, 
compliance 
with 
applicable legislation and so forth.  
 
So if you look at our functions, it is only that we are 
doing that, but then it means that the existence of the OIGI 
may sort of you know bring about the situation where these 
other institutions cannot come and do oversight over the 
intelligence services themselves.  
 
There was a reason for that obviously, [indistinct] 
you know, still you know under the sail of secrecy. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So prior to 29 November 2016, for 
22 
months 
the 
office 
of 
the 
inspector 
general 
of 
intelligence was vacant.  
MR DINTWE:  That is correct.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it is worth mentioning Chair, 
that at least some if not much of the evidence given, 
covers that period given by the state security agency 
witnesses.   
MR 
DINTWE: 
 
May 
I 
please 
also 
mention 
to 
the 
Chairperson to say that, and we need to say what exercise 
20 
elevated this situation.  It is what you are saying advocate 
we will be dealing with later, which talks about how the 
legislation, the Oversight Act is drafted. 
 
Now the legislation does not create an office, does 
not say office of the inspector general of intelligence.  I am 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 282 of 362 
 
only using this word, you cannot find it there.  It talks 
about IGI, and it becomes this particular person.  In the 
absence of that person, no one else in the office can do 
the work, because then it gives me the powers also to then 
delegate my powers.  
 
So in the absence of that - and I thought I thought 
maybe I should just mention that point. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 10 you have already told 
the Chair that your mandate is to conduct intelligence 
oversight 
on 
all 
statutory 
intelligence 
services, 
crime 
10 
intelligence of the South African Police Defence Intelligence 
of the South African National Defence Force and now the 
State Security Agency.  Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 11 you deal with Section 7 
of the Oversight Act which sets out what you state in 
paragraph 11 to be your accountability and mandate.  76 
says –  
“The Inspector General shall be accountable 
to the committee for the overall functioning 
20 
of his or her office and shall report on his or 
her activities and the performance of his or 
her functions to the committee at least once 
a year.” 
 
I take it that that committee is the Joint Standing 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 283 of 362 
 
Committee of Intelligence? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then 7A what does that provide? 
Section 7A. 
DR DINTWE:  It is 77A. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes 77A. 
DR DINTWE:  It talks about the monitoring of compliance by 
any service with the constitution applicable laws and 
relevant policies on intelligence and counter-intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And those policies would – 
10 
what are those policies? Just name one or other of them 
please? 
DR DINTWE:  It includes their own policies and in this 
instance one can mention what they called the MTD’s. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. Internal policies. 
DR DINTWE:  Ja even that your own internal policies yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So white paper? 
DR DINTWE:  It could be – it could be a policy of recruitment 
for instance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What about the white paper would 
20 
that be a policy which you would monitor compliance with? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson we can also 
monitor compliance with that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  While we are on the white paper in 
your view what is the status of that white paper?  There has 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 284 of 362 
 
been commentary by a number of witnesses who have to put 
it at its lowest different perspectives on the status of the 
white paper, what is your evidence in that regard? 
DR DINTWE:  My evidence is that the legislation including 
the constitution mirrors exactly what is contained in the – in 
the white paper.  In fact any deviation from that will be 
problematic because it was a policy document where they sat 
down and they said that this is how we want you know 
Intelligence Services to be configured and these are the 
powers that we will like.  So all those other piece of 
10 
legislation such as the Strategic Intelligence Act such as the 
Intelligence Services Act much as the Oversight Act itself are 
sort of your coming out – out of the white paper.  So our 
position and the legal advice that I had from my 00:03:33 is 
that it should not be ingot and non-compliance with white 
paper we churn as an office make some findings and 
recommendations on it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you need to make use of the white 
paper where as you put it its contents of principles are 
20 
already mirrored in the constitution or legislation because I 
would have thought that once that has been done you must 
just comply with the constitution and the legislation. 
DR DINTWE:  Our position and maybe my submission also to 
the high level review panel was to say that it should not you 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 285 of 362 
 
know belong to the dustbin of history especially in instances 
where you will have a lacuna – a lacuna in the current 
legislation.  For instance one of the biggest issues that 
happened was the amalgamation of the then National 
Intelligence Agency and the then SASS – South African 
Secret Services and it just happened by a proclamation.  So 
the current Strategic Intelligence Act may not have been 
sufficient to deal with the how those different services could 
be amalgamated or even disentangled as the – intending to 
do it now.  That is my position Chairperson it is not a legal 
10 
argument. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Alright.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What does 77C say? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry.  What you did not 
tell me about maybe it was not important but now that you 
tell me about legal advice is your own background a legal 
background or not? 
DR 
DINTWE: 
 
No, 
no 
I 
am 
qualified 
in 
forensic 
20 
investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  So you have to depend 
on legal advisors? 
DR DINTWE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 286 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Section 77C of the Oversight Act 
what does that provide? 
DR DINTWE:  It sees that I shall also perform all functions 
designated 
to 
me 
by 
the 
President 
or 
any 
Minister 
responsible for a service. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  How do you interpret that in relation 
to your duties to investigate from an independent stand 
point? 
DR DINTWE:  We are calling them a task team.  So which 
means that the Minister will for instance have a serious 
10 
problem with let us say absenteeism in one of the agencies 
and she may just decide to say that the Inspector General 
because you have got the investigative powers please 
investigate this particular matter.  But it is not like they 
really supervise me instruct and supervise me.  I think that is 
when you are struggling to draw a difference and the 
Ministers are also struggling to draw a difference.  They 
think that to – for me to perform designated functions it is 
like they can you know just tell me what to do and supervise 
me throughout there.  So the outcome here will be an 
20 
independent outcome and unfortunately if the President likes 
it or if he does not like it is something else. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then sub-paragraph CA of 
Section 77 what does that provide? 
DR DINTWE:  I then receive an investigate complaints from 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 287 of 362 
 
members of the public and members of the services.  In 
other words there are three services that he has mentioned 
earlier.  On the following alleged maladministration, abuse of 
power, transgressions of the constitution, laws and policies 
referred to in paragraph A. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then sub-B of 77? 
DR DINTWE:  Oh then – I am sorry about that I see that I left 
out a very important part there which deals with also 
investigating any contraventions of the Prevention And 
Combating Of Corrupt Activities Act. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And the improper enrichment 
of any person through an act or omission of any member? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That would be a member of the 
Security Services? 
DR DINTWE:  But from the public as well very much 
important. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And as I understand how you read 
the provisions of the act in relation to your independent 
oversight function that you may be requested or designated 
20 
to the function of conducting an investigation but in the 
conduct of the investigation that is your business as an 
independent oversight body? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then sub-D what does that 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 288 of 362 
 
provide? 
DR DINTWE:  Alright now all these functions which are 
contained in 77 it is – I normally summarise them to say 
more in.  We do monitoring.  We do review and then we also 
investigate complaints.   
 
Now at the – at the end of the financial year they all 
culminate into what we will then call a certificate.  A 
certificate they use that word in the oversight act but it is 
more like an annual report where I then you know summarise 
I would have done monitoring there.  There are problems 
10 
there.  There will be reviews.  There are problems there.  It 
will be investigation of complaints and so forth.  And then I 
submit that certificate firstly to the Ministers responsible 
Ministers and then I later go to the Joint Standing Committee 
on Intelligence to make a presentation on my findings and 
recommendations as they are contained in that.  It is 
normally a lengthy document around 60/70 pages or so.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and sub-E and sub-F. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Over the page. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Mr Pretorius.  The document you are 
talking about is the document that is called certificate? 
DR DINTWE:  Yes in terms of the Oversight Act they refer to 
it in under level C a certificate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so – so when you talk about a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 289 of 362 
 
certificate in your affidavit I must not have in mind a one 
page document it is like a certificate it is a lengthy 
document.  It is then in effect as you say an annual report is 
then in effect as you say an annual report. 
DR DINTWE:  It is like an annual report but you raise a very 
important issue so I will have like a one pager. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  We even you know print it in colours and so 
forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
DR DINTWE:  And in there I will say that I am – I express an 
opinion on whether anything done by the intelligence 
services was in contravention of the law and or the 
constitution or their own internal policies.  So I will write that 
but the certificate which is a one pager it is always 
accompanied by an annexure.  So we will call it an annexure.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
DR DINTWE:  But it will be a narrative report because in a 
one pager I will say that I am not satisfied with this and I am 
dealing with it in paragraph 18. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, yes. 
DR DINTWE:  AB and C in the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  But then we bind it.  So and you would have 
three. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 290 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  Because we make one certificate per service. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then sub-E and F over the page 
deal with your duty to submit reports to the JSCI to the 
Ministers 
that 
we 
have 
mentioned 
and 
in 
certain 
circumstances to the President. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now all these reports and certificates 
are a matter of record.  They can be provided to the Chair 
10 
but depending on decisions concerning declassification they 
may not be able to be released to the public. 
DR DINTWE:  I know that you do not want us to delete in a 
piece meal fashion but I have done that activity already 
because what I have done in terms of – they are my 
documents so I have got a lot of powers to really 
declassified.  What I have done is that I have redacted all 
the information which deals with organisational weaknesses 
which deals with their methods of the intelligence as well as 
the – what they call sources or informers if you like.  So I 
20 
have already removed that kind of information because what 
I wanted to show the commission is only the transactions 
procurement and all those other issues.  So yes of course 
that they will be submitted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  They will be submitted to the Chair in 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 291 of 362 
 
due course suitably redacted.  Then paragraph 12 – 12A is a 
reference to Section 7 (10) of the Oversight Act which 
enjoins 
you 
to 
comply 
with 
all 
security 
requirements 
applicable to employees of the agency.  Now that becomes 
relevant as you will detail later in relation to your own 
security classification, is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Security clearance. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we will deal with that in due 
10 
course.  And also some anomalies that arise out of that 
process and who performs that process.  Then sub-B says: 
“Shall serve impartially and independently 
and perform his or her functions in good faith 
and without fear, favour, bias or prejudice.” 
 
Now those are fine words.  What import do they have 
for your work? 
DR DINTWE:  It is that the independence is guaranteed and 
it is you know even in the – in legislation so I think that as 
we go deeper into my evidence I will want to portray to the 
20 
commission how that independence has been you know 
undermined to an extent that one day will be asked a 
question where were you when things were getting so 
00:14:00. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Now –  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 292 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well I must say that I was already 
asking those questions when I was hearing a lot of SASSA 
evidence or not SASSA – SSA evidence so where was the 
Inspector General?  But you are here now to tell me where 
you were. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
DR DINTWE:  And I 00:14:36 justify anything I have got to 
admit to their failures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we will get there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will get there ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair and then in relation to the 
manner in which the constitutional court has described the 
requisite independence of an oversight body you refer to the 
Glennister case it is referenced there if I can just read the 
last three or four sentences or lines of that paragraph where 
the court held that: 
“Independence 
in 
this 
context 
therefore 
means the 
ability to function 
effectively 
20 
without 
any 
undue 
influence 
it 
is 
this 
autonomy that is an important factor which 
will affect the performance of the anti-
corruption agency.” 
 
Now that decision was made in relation to the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 293 of 362 
 
directorate for Priority Crime Investigation or the Hawks but 
do you say or are you submitting to the Chair that that 
applies with equal force to your office? 
DR DINTWE:  That is our submission Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Has that prescript in your 
experience always been followed? 
DR DINTWE:  No not in all instances. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. And then reference is made 
to the McBride case and the decision is referred to in 
paragraph 15 where you deal with the question of the 
10 
independence of IPID but are you saying to the Chair that 
similar principles apply in your case? 
DR DINTWE:  That is our submission Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Particularly in regard to appointment 
and removal of the incumbent of the post. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And very importantly in paragraph 16 
you 
note 
that 
in 
both 
Glennister 
and 
McBride 
the 
constitutional court held that: 
“The public perception of the Independence 
20 
of the Institution is an integral feature of its 
actual independence.  This requires that a 
reasonably informed and reasonable member 
of the public will have confidence in an 
entity’s autonomous protection and oversight 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 294 of 362 
 
capabilities.” 
 
I may just intervene there – there may be a well 
reasonable suspicion that we drafted this on this your behalf, 
is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:  Ja but I – I did draft that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You drafted this. 
DR DINTWE:  Yes.  Chairperson yes independently so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I like the way you put it Mr Pretorius.  
Legitimate suspicion – reasonable suspicion. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Legitimate expectations which is not 
10 
met in this case. 
DR DINTWE:  Alright Chairperson you may have asked me 
earlier my qualification is not a law degree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DR DINTWE:  I did what they called Bachelor of Criminal 
Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  That was my junior degree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DR DINTWE:  And then I ventured into like your forensics 
20 
when I got to Masters so… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  It had a lot of law modules. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DR DINTWE:  Where eventfully understood of law. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 295 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But these are your submissions? 
DR DINTWE:  These are my submissions. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then in paragraph 17 you say: 
“The Inspector General of Intelligence should 
be 
accountable 
to 
the 
Joint 
Standing 
Committee of Intelligence to the Legislature 
alone.  It is constituted – the JSCI is 
constituted by a proportional representation 
of political parties.  It is therefore designed 
10 
to represent the interests of the people more 
broadly than the government of the day.” 
 
Is that again your submission? 
DR DINTWE:  That is also my submission that is correct 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You trace some of the history 
of executive members relative to state security in paragraph 
18 and following would you deal with those just briefly just 
name the officials please and say when they held office. 
DR DINTWE:  I will do that and I am going to be very brief 
20 
Chairperson in 1994 there was no Minister of State Security.  
There were subordinated – they use that word – they were 
subordinated to the Minister of Justice so you will have this 
big Ministry of Justice and then you will have a Deputy 
Minister and at that time it was Minister the Late Joe 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 296 of 362 
 
Nhlanhla who became the Deputy Minister of Justice but with 
responsibility of the Intelligence Affairs. 
 
In 2000 the Ministry was established and it was led 
by Ministers I will just mention a name and the years. 
Lindiwe Sisulu from 2000 to 2004 and it also had Minister 
Ronnie Kastrils from 2004 to 2008 followed by Minister 
Siyabonga Cwele 2008 to 2014 and then later Minister David 
Masobo from 2014 to 2017 and then also followed by 
Advocate Bongani Bongo who was there only until February 
2019  I think he was 00:20:10 of two months and then he 
10 
was followed by Minister Letsatsi Duba and then followed 
from May 2019 by Minister Ayanda Dlolo who is still there in 
cabinet now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And in relation to the office of 
the IGI paragraph 22? 
DR DINTWE:  Ja we start this a little bit earlier in 2004 but 
there will be some other arrangements that happened before 
that I did not think that they will be so much relevant but one 
of my predecessors was Mr Zolani Nakane who was 
appointed as the IGI in 2004 and he remained in office until 
20 
December 2009.  The position was vacant from December 
2009 to April 2010 when the late Ambassador Faith Radebe 
took over and then she held that position for five years until 
2015 until I 00:21:12 that office 22 months later which then 
will be 2017. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 297 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And you make the remark in 
the last sentence at paragraph 22 that it has not been in the 
interest of the public that is so vital in oversight post has 
remained vacant for extended periods? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You confirm that.  Right then in – this 
is reasonably important in relation to the history of your 
engagement with the commission the provisions of Section 
7(8) A and B of the Oversight Act  
“Provide that the Inspector General shall 
10 
have access to any intelligence information 
or premises under the control of any of the 
intelligence services if such access to any 
intelligence 
information 
or 
premises 
is 
required by the Inspector General for the 
performance of his or her functions and he 
shall be entitled to demand from the Head of 
the service in question and its employees 
such intelligence information reports and 
explanations as the Inspector General may 
20 
be necessary for the performance of his or 
her functions.” 
 
And if we can just complete that before you answer 
any questions in that regard.  Paragraph 24 you refer to 
Section 7(9) 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 298 of 362 
 
“Access 
to 
intelligence 
information 
or 
premises contemplated in sub-section 8(a) 
may not be held – be withheld from the 
Inspector General on any ground.” 
 
Now we will deal towards the end of your evidence in 
relation to events that have happened in the past month or 
so subsequent to the testimony of the witnesses in January 
of this year before the commission.  But very briefly what is 
the import of these sections? 
DR DINTWE:  The import of that section I will see that it will 
10 
be twofold.  The first one is to ensure that the – this office is 
never ever denied any information.  In fact Chairperson they 
even make it a criminal offence to do that.  Because 
Intelligence Services by their own nature are secretive in 
nature and it is an acceptable principle worldwide.  So here 
they wanted this particular office which will have an 
unfettered access to intelligence because since we will get 
hidden.  But the second point there is that – alright the 
second point is that it shows that the Inspector General of 
Intelligence it says there may deem necessary for the 
20 
performance of his or her functions.  It was also in our view 
trying to you know prevent a situation that I was telling the 
Chairperson about earlier this year an instance where you 
will get the other functionary who will want to take the 
discretion as well as the powers of this particular office.  So 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 299 of 362 
 
in other words I do have a right to even meet with the people 
from the commission, people from the Hawks if you like or 
even people from IPID and be able to deal with that 
information or the accessed information there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right it is important that the 
information to which you are entitled in terms of the Act is 
that which you deem necessary not anybody else. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But it is also important that it is 
stated in two senses you are entitled to the information and 
10 
nobody may refuse to give you that information as I 
understand the position on any ground. 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And failure to comply with Section 
7(8) that is in relation to your access to intelligence and 
premises and the like is an offence as you pointed out. 
DR DINTWE:  That is an offence that is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And then in paragraph 26 you 
mention one of the requirements which will become relevant 
later preceding the appointment of an Inspector General of 
20 
Intelligence what is that? 
DR DINTWE:  That is what they call a security clearance.  
So you will be vetted. You will undergo this process of being 
vetted and the requirement there is that I should be cleared 
at a level of secret – top secret in fact.  In other words the – 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 300 of 362 
 
that provision means that I may be recommended by 
Parliament, get appointed by the President but if I fail this 
requirement I will not occupy the position of Inspector 
General of Intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Now in paragraph 27 you deal 
with how you understand oversight and it may be a matter of 
controversy and is indeed a matter of controversy but how do 
you interpret and apply the legislative framework which 
provides for you oversight function? 
DR DINTWE:  Yes it remains a debatable issue in terms of 
10 
what oversight is and so forth and we also – I have those 
engagements with the first person that I worked on the 
affidavit – I mean here because he was saying that but the 
constitutional 
provision 
talks 
about 
monitoring 
of 
the 
Intelligence Services and my take – my position is that in 
fact the word oversight is all encompassing because it 
includes monitoring, it includes review, it also includes 
investigation of complaints.  The other people feel that the 
word monitoring and review may also be semantics we do 
not think so.  We think that monitoring can happen 
20 
simultaneously with whatever so if – I want to make a – an 
example which is not controversial I think ja.  
 
If – if there is a 00:27:40 agency says that we want to 
recruit some – some students so that they can be employed 
permanently I can even you know go to those interviews.  I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 301 of 362 
 
can be involved in the selection process and the short 
listings and so forth so we see that as monitoring.  Whereas 
review may happen in hindsight when the whole process has 
been completed and you are able to really look – look into 
that.  But our take is that oversight really encompasses all 
this activities that we are doing. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 28 you state what the 
provisions are that govern the intelligent services as well as 
the office of the IGI and you mentioned the constitution and 
the oversight act.  You also mention policy documents which 
10 
contain checks and balances which include the white paper 
on 
intelligence 
and 
the 
minimum 
information 
security 
standards.  The missed document to which the Chair referred 
earlier and other aspects of the regulatory framework 
regulations 
directives, 
policies 
and 
standard 
operating 
procedures all those constitute the governing framework of 
the Intelligence Agencies, am I correct? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right in the case of the SSA the lack 
of effective checks and balances was listed as one of the 
20 
cardinal reasons for the alleged malfeasance corruption and 
fraud perpetrated at SSA.  That is your statement in 
paragraph 29. 
DR DINTWE:  I confirm that is my statement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that state of affairs apparently 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 302 of 362 
 
led to the establishment of the high level review panel 
chaired by Dr Mufamadi which we have spoken about here 
and we will speak more about in due course but evidence 
has been led in that regard.  Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we will deal in due course with 
the findings of not only that but also of two preceding 
inquiries.  Can you name those, please? 
DR DINTWE:   There was what we call the NESU(?) report.  
I would like you to – it is a long name – I would like you to 
10 
direct me to these two paragraphs that ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ja, we will deal with it in due 
course. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   NESU ...[intervenes]  
DR DINTWE:   ...later Chairperson, ja.  It is a long name.  
It is two different panels. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the second one was a panel 
that sat during 2006.  Am I correct? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
DR DINTWE:   No, the first one was 2006.  The second one 
was 2008. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 303 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And they made very clear 
findings in regard to the Office of the Inspector General 
Intelligence and in particular its independent function. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we will highlight those in due 
course, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 30.  What was the 
question?  You can read it if you wish to the Chair that was 
posed by the High Level Review Panel? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   That is exactly Chairperson why I said 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...request. 
DR DINTWE:   Oh, sorry.  That is exactly why I was saying 
that there could be questions by the next generation even 
who says that:  Where was the oversight when this was 
happening? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the questions may come 
sooner than the next generation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
20 
DR DINTWE:   Oh, yes.  So my submission to the 
Commission followed – it was followed by a particular 
phrase which said:   
“The 
framers 
of 
our 
Constitution 
and 
Democratic 
Intelligence 
policy 
and 
the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 304 of 362 
 
legislation created and oversight system for 
our Intelligence Service comparable to the 
best in the world comprising a bicameral multi-
party Parliamentary Committee, the JSCI and 
the IGI. 
The question is.  Given the abuses and 
infractions identified in this report, did this 
oversight mechanisms function effectively, and 
if not, why not?...” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then in paragraph 31, what is 
10 
your contention in this regard? 
DR DINTWE:   My contention is ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...quite generally stated. 
DR DINTWE:   Okay.  My contention is that if the OIPI was 
strengthened, Chairperson, there was not even a need for 
the HLRP, of the high-level – what you call a multi-panel 
because then we would have been able, you know, deal 
with all that work.  I mean, if you look at what the 
Oversight Act says we can do, it is – I think it is a lot.   
 
I mean, if we deal with the provincial of the and 
20 
the combating of the Corruption Activity Act.  If we deal 
with maladministration, abuse of power and all those other 
issues.  That is exactly the reasons that led to the 
establishment of the High-Level Review Panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you say in paragraph 31 that 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 305 of 362 
 
had the OIPI been sufficiently strengthened.  What would 
you say to the proposition that it had all the powers, it had 
access to premises, it had access to documentation?  No 
one could refuse that.  How did it occur?  We will get to it 
in more detail but perhaps you can begin to address the 
question.  How could it happen that what appears to be a 
vast 
amount 
of 
fraud 
and 
corruption 
occurred 
...[intervenes]  
DR DINTWE:   The first ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...Security Agency. 
10 
DR DINTWE:   Oh, sorry, sorry.  The first basic reason will 
obviously be that after the term of tenure of Mr Ngcakani it 
remained vacant.  And after the period of Advocate Faith 
Radebe, it remained again vacant for 22-months.  But the 
strengthening, we will deal with that.  I think that what I 
can say at this stage is that and we are ...[indistinct]    
 
There is a colleague of mine here who is 
accompanying me.  He will tell me if I should not tell – I 
should not disclose this.  But we are waiting nationally, 
Chairperson, and my staff compliment is only 34-people.  
20 
We do not even have a satellite office, a provincial office 
whatsoever.  I do not think that that is a sign of strength of 
an institution which has to deal with such in cumbersome 
work of overseeing the Intelligence Service. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is the issue of capacity. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 306 of 362 
 
DR 
DINTWE: 
 
 
There 
is 
a 
big 
issue 
of 
capacity, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Lack of independence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   But also the vacancy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  There are vacancies which are not 
filled? 
DR DINTWE:   There are vacancies that are not filled out 
of the 34, I am only sitting with 24-people. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Some of them are only doing administrative 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And they are not really investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But has there been an exercise done 
which seeks to answer the question how many staff should 
it have, should this office have if it is to realistically and 
effectively do its job?  Has there been that kind of 
exercise?  
20 
 
And is there a report that has been furnished to 
those who control the purse and those who can do 
whatever is necessary to say:  Look, if you want this office 
to be effective, at least the minimum in terms of staffing 
requirements is the minimum and 34 is way below that or 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 307 of 362 
 
anything like that.  Or has that exercise not been done? 
DR DINTWE:   We have done that many a times, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   When I assumed my position I also 
developed what we call 20/22 Vision.  It was a five year 
strategy of the office.  And we came up with a structure 
that we then submitted together with what we call a 
Concept Document but in the Concept Document because 
we do not have legislative powers, legislations making 
10 
powers, 
we 
were 
normally 
advised 
the 
...[indistinct] 
Committee on Intelligence that we are sitting here and we 
have a practical experience of how this legislation works.  
So we would have written to them.   
 
I know the Legal Team always laughs this off – 
well, I mean not off, they really get surprised when I tell 
them that the Inspector General of Intelligence does not 
have the appointing powers.  The legislation phase, the 
Minister of State Security shall appoint people to the Office 
of the Inspector General of Intelligence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
DR DINTWE:   It has never happened since I got there.  
People have gone all the time and some have resigned and 
so forth.  No one – there is no one, not even a single 
person who was appointed for the past four years that I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 308 of 362 
 
was in this office, which makes perfect sense.   
 
I mean if I was a Minister myself, I would not 
appoint 
people 
to 
go 
to 
an 
office 
which 
were 
to 
pestering(?) with me.  I mean, as an institution. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but of course, that has to be wrong 
because if legislation says there must be the Office of the 
Inspector General of Intelligence or there must be the 
Inspector General of Intelligence to perform the following 
functions. 
 
If 
those 
functions 
cannot 
effectively 
be 
performed by the Inspector General of Intelligence without 
10 
other people or professionals, then you are making – 
rendering the office ineffective if you know that there are 
vacancies and nothing is done to fill those vacancies and if 
you have... 
 
I guess it would be difficult to say appointments 
are not made because we have no money, you know.  
Because how then do you expect the office to perform if 
already there has been a determination that at least there 
should be – there is justification for there to be 34-posts.  
It is different if you have not elected and it has not been 
20 
made.   
DR DINTWE:   Chairperson, later I quote a paragraph from 
one of the letters from the Director General, from the 
representative of the SSA then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 309 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   ...the former one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And I address exactly that issue.  I take out 
in paragraph where he writes to me to say that we cannot 
fill those positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And what exhaust(?) the state of affairs is 
that there are funded positions at least even minimum.  So 
this would have been the people who would have left, went 
on retirement or resigned or got transferred, for instance.  
10 
So even if you do not then change this branch of 34, at 
least let us deal with the funded positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   The funded positions are there, the money 
will always be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  Issues of the strength of the 
Office of the IGI, which you have mentioned in paragraph 
31, 
its 
independence 
and 
its 
capacity 
to 
function 
effectively, you deal with in the following paragraphs but 
20 
an illustrative example is your budget.  Who and how is 
your budget determined?  Who determines your budget?  
How is it determined? 
DR DINTWE:   Alright.  The Oversight Act says that the 
budget of the individuals shall be appropriated through the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 310 of 362 
 
vote of the Ministry of State Security which is not a 
problem.  We do not have a problem with that because we 
do not necessarily to have a vote.  What we have a 
problem with is that there is no prior determination that is 
made before the money reaches the State Security Agency.  
So it will only be after that, after they have received.  Let 
us say they give them a thousand rand.  Now I have to go 
there and back as if I am one of the Chief Directorates 
there.  They are calling(?) the other department to their 
directorate what they will say what our requirements or our 
10 
needs are standing at about hundred-and-thirty rand, you 
know.  So I also come there.  And the Director General 
then determines whether he is going to give me what I 
have requested.  Chairperson, I was never ever given what 
I would have requested.  So there would be a particular 
baseline and they will always give me that money.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the point about that is that the 
very body and office over which you have oversight, the 
SSA, is the very body whom you have to deal with in 
obtaining your budget.  Is that correct? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, probably maybe that is the issue 
because otherwise everyone who has to ask somebody, the 
government for money will tell you they never get given 
what they want, you know, [laughs] where even with 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 311 of 362 
 
government departments, ministers will always complain, 
you know, that the Minister of Finance will not give you 
what you want.  Now you come and you say this is what I 
want and you think you have motivated sufficiently but they 
always or very often you will get a little bit less.  But it is 
important that whoever makes that decision must be 
somebody who can be taken to – take into account on 
legitimate factors in deciding.  But your point might be that 
what you would prefer is that the money that should be 
used by IGI should be ring fenced by Parliament even if it 
10 
is under SSA or whoever but you should not be talking to 
somebody about how much it should be.  Parliament should 
ring fence it and say this is for IGI and then you should be 
able to use it for the operations of your office.  And if 
somebody has to account for it other than yourself, then it 
must at least be furnishing whatever needs to be furnished 
but Parliament should be the ones who say – Parliament 
should be able to say out of this budget for SSA, it is SSA, 
so much is for IGI and cannot be touched by somebody 
else.  Is that what you are talking about or not really? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   I was asked that question ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   ...you know by the committee when I was 
asked for their intervention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 312 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   And they at least understood initially. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Need to mean that I want to be given above 
all 
these 
other 
departments 
and 
that 
was 
not 
my 
contention.  Now this is how where we are at now.  In 
2016/2017, the Head of Corporate Services writes to the 
DG of SSA and say that you have been given us this 
budget but for 2016 and early 2017 we do not have an 
Inspector General.  So we will not be able to use that 
particular money.  So they only said that you - in the 
10 
meantime just give us money so that we can pay for rent, 
lines(?), personnel costs and so forth. 
 
So the money was reduced at a particular point.  
When I started in 2017, it was already the beginning of a 
new financial year and I nicely went back to them and said 
but this was the baseline.  So they would have removed a 
lot of money.  Now they wanted me to start again where 
they would have, you know, put that particular amount in 
other ways. 
 
I started with a budget which did not include the 
20 
operations of a fully functional office now because I had 
taken incumbency there.  And that has always been my 
argument.  My argument is never to say that I know that 
even SSA themselves their budget has been cut over and 
over again.  I think two consecutive years now.  All the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 313 of 362 
 
other departments.   
 
I understand all the pressures of the fiscals.  All 
what I am saying is that if my baseline was standing at 
thousand rand and somebody in my office, rightly so, came 
and said do not give me three thousand this year because I 
am not going to be able to – give me five hundred rand.  
We can expect that then I start with five hundred and I 
start moving at a cost of about 4% or 5% because that is 
what they do just to cater for the personal expenditure and 
for the increment and so forth.  So you cannot expect me 
10 
to do that.  To start there again and start building a new 
baseline.  That is my complaint. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So your complaint is that there is a 
certain baseline that was determined at a certain stage 
there may have been a valid reason to go below that at a 
certain stage when there was no IGI but once there was – 
once you had been appointed should have gone back to the 
baseline. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You are not complaining about 
20 
wanting it to be ring fenced or anything?  That is not 
your...? 
DR DINTWE:   Oh, no.  By the way, Chairperson.  Maybe I 
should have mentioned that we managed to get ring 
fencing.   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 314 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, that is done by Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that is achieved? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has been achieved? 
DR DINTWE:   It is achieved.  The only problem is that it is 
done after the money has been given to the State Security 
Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Ring fencing should happen on the other 
10 
side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Because this model works perfectly 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   ...with the Public Protector who are giving 
the 
budget, 
I 
think, 
through 
Justice 
Constitutional 
Development.  We will have IEC who are getting from 
Home Affairs.  So they never really – and I think NP(?) also 
getting from somewhere.  But during the appropriation in 
20 
Parliament, 
they 
have 
already 
made 
a 
determination 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   ...that this amount ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 315 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   ...belongs to – ja, IP is a good example.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   This amount belongs to IP. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that has not been done in regard to 
IPI? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The ring fencing happens after the 
Parliament has appropriated? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the ring fencing gets done by SSA? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   By SSA, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And your point is, it should be done by 
Parliament just as it is done in regard to the Public 
Protector and other institutions? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  And just so that the point 
is not lost then.  We were talking about it earlier.  You 
monitor the SSA and call the SSA to account? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it appropriate in your view that 
that instance which you have the duty to monitor has a 
hand in determining your budget? 
DR DINTWE:   It is not right at all because it undermines 
independence but again you are sitting with these people 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 316 of 362 
 
that you are basically dependent on them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And then you raised another 
point in relation to the budgetary situation.  What do Crime 
Intelligence and Defence Intelligence think about your 
relationship with the SSA in relation to your budget? 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, let us call it a third-party tendons(?) 
Chairperson because I am sitting in the premises of the 
ministry administer.  I am sitting on the server of the 
agency and the complaint by some – the management of 
Crime Intelligence may not be current as well as the 
10 
Defence. 
 
Is 
that 
in 
this 
instance 
we 
have 
a 
counterintelligence 
mandate 
to 
protect 
our 
own 
information. 
 
So you are sitting there on the ICT infrastructure 
of the SSA.  In other words, their beef is that SSA could 
have an upper hand in as far as the information is 
concerned because I call up the information, I go to my 
office but I am in the same premises.  I mean, they can 
open those premises.  They are providing security there 
and everything.  So that is the complaint as it comes from 
20 
the other services, Intelligence Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us take a ten minutes 
adjournment.  Or do you want to ask one more question? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just one questions, if I may. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 317 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that we do not overlook it  I 
might overlook it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is correct that your information, 
your digital information is on the server of the SSA? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that appropriate? 
DR DINTWE:   No, it is not appropriate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if you receive a complaint from a 
member of the public about SSA or members of SSA, once 
10 
it is in your own system they can access it? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I mean, ja, I think the digital people 
will also tell you there is always – I mean, if I owe the 
infrastructure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   It is my infrastructure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   It does not even need like special skills. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   I think that if you are looking it from 
20 
employer ’s point of view is that always I will have a right to 
access the systems of other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
DR DINTWE:   Just to check a few things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 318 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us take a ten minutes 
adjournment and then we will continue.  I think we will 
come back at quarter past or so.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In the context of the independence 
of the Inspector General of Intelligence and his or her 
office we are dealing with two aspects in your statement.  
10 
The first is issues of the structure of the office, the context 
within which it operates in certain administrative matters 
like the budget and other operational matters.  We will get 
in a moment to the conduct of the SSA in your experience, 
that 
is 
a 
separate 
and 
second 
issue 
affecting 
the 
independence of the OIGI.  
 
In paragraph 32 to summarise it aptly, I think, would 
you care to read that paragraph onto the record? 
DR DINTWE:   I say there, Chairperson, that: 
“The 
OIGI 
has 
since 
its 
establishment 
been 
20 
dependent upon the minister of State Security and 
the SSA for its operational needs.  Operational 
needs include but are not limited to the expenditure 
(budget) which is allocated to the OIGI by the SSA, 
the payment of the personnel necessary to perform 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 319 of 362 
 
its mandate, the information and communication 
technology or ICT made available to it, the office 
space allocated to it and other tools needed for the 
function of the OIGI.  This has led to a set party 
independence 
that 
undermines 
the 
required 
independence of the OIGI and impinges upon its 
ability effectively discharge its mandate.  This is 
because the OIGI is both beholden to in terms of 
the operational needs of the OIGI and responsible 
for the auditing of the SSA and when necessary. 
10 
The Minister of State Security.” 
This is further demonstrated in the other paragraphs. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then in paragraphs 33 to 35 you 
deal with the classification of the office of the Inspector 
General of Intelligence in terms of the Public Service Act 
and in summary, and we need not go into detail, in 
summary what you are arguing for here is that the office of 
the Inspector General of Intelligence should not fall within 
the SSA administratively or operationally, it should be a 
separate entity in terms of the Public Service Act.  Do I 
20 
understand your argument correctly? 
DR DINTWE:   You understand my argument correctly, 
Chairperson, I further submit that its form is unknown, that 
is the terms that they use that they will tell you that you do 
not know what is the situation, the statutory body is the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 320 of 362 
 
constitutional body inside a government department you 
will 
have 
national 
department, 
it 
is 
the 
provincial 
department and that is exactly what the Public Service Act 
does when we talk about the scheduling of different 
institutions of government. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So as I understand what you say 
and of course there may be other explanations or excuses 
or whatever, the SSA does not say to you you can have 
your own server, it says use our server. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct and, Chairperson, each time 
10 
you ask them – because I am Mafiki Zola, I only came 
yesterday, but there will be history, you know, attached to 
that.  So I kept on asking them which legal framework was 
used to put this office here and you never ever get that 
answer because the Oversight Act does not say anything 
about an administrative connection between the OIGI and 
any of the Intelligence services, not even the SSA itself.  
So there is nothing in legislation which provides for that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And then in paragraph 35, 
second sentence, you make the point that we mentioned 
20 
just before the short adjournment where you say in reality, 
however, the SSA and its Director General in particular 
holds the administrative power and the purse strings over 
the OIGI, its own oversight body. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 321 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the resultant outcome of 
the structure that you operated under, is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then you say in paragraph 36: 
“The extent oversight powers of the OIGI have been 
further undermined by the conduct of the SSA and 
the Director General in particular.” 
To whom are you referring there? 
DR DINTWE:   I am referring to Mr Arthur Fraser. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, what do you say, what is your 
10 
description of those events which have led you to that 
conclusion in paragraph 36? 
DR DINTWE:   Correct, it will be a plethora of issues that 
actually came to the fore that I actually ended up in court 
trying to litigate and get an interdict against Mr Arthur 
Fraser.  So it is a plethora of them, I hope that maybe Adv 
Pretorius will be able to gloss through them as we go into 
this.   
 
May I also remark, Chairperson, if you allow me to 
say that when I was working on this affidavit I had a 
20 
discussion and I said that it should not sound as a 
personal grievance.  So every time I talk about these 
issues I was trying to show how they defeat the principle of 
independence other than dealing with myself as a person 
at a particular point.  In other words, this can also be 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 322 of 362 
 
applicable to any other identification 06.37 at any given 
time.  So I had that discussion I think with the legal team 
here also to say that I just do not know how to produce 
these issues or to show the Commission that I am talking 
about the whole office is defeated, not a person or even 
any office employees. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, so you worked with the 
Director General of the SSA Arthur Fraser during a period 
of your incumbency of the office of the IGI, is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And what you are going to tell the 
Chair later is what your opinion is of the elements of that 
relationship which you experienced. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, I will be doing that, 
Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Let us go then to paragraph 
38 and deal with the filling of vacant posts in the OIGI.  
Who has that power as you understand the position? 
DR DINTWE:   It is the Minister of State Security in 
consultation with the OIGI. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The Minister or the Director 
General? 
DR DINTWE:   The Minister, the oversight act is the 
Minister. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, because you say in 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 323 of 362 
 
paragraph 38 – then you could explain this because it 
seems somewhat different to what you have just said now.  
You say: 
“Under crucial factor which has served to undermine 
the independence of the OIGI is the control the 
Director General of the SSA has over the filling of 
vacant posts in the OIGI.” 
Is that correct or must we qualify it? 
DR DINTWE:   I can qualify it.  I am not even rectifying it, 
that was intended statement.  Any Minister will have what 
10 
they call a political oversight over these institutions so in 
an ideal world they do not get to involve themselves on 
issues of budget, on issues of operations and all those 
other issues.  So, by extension, although the legislation 
says 
that 
the 
Minister 
shall 
appoint, 
when 
I 
make 
appointments, the person who is sitting with the money is 
the accounting officer who is the Director General of the 
SSA and it is a well-known fact.  That is how the 
communication will go.  I will talk to the Minister and say 
the Minister – if it ever happens, it has never happened, 
20 
unfortunately, but I will say Minister, there are two vacant 
positions which are critical.  For instance, I do not have an 
office manager, I need to run my own office., I need to run 
my own office, I never had a PA for a very long time, I got 
somebody somewhere in the office to do that and then 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 324 of 362 
 
immediately after communicating that, the Minister may 
write to the Director General and say that please the deal 
with this.  But the ultimate power of releasing the money, 
of conducting interviews and so forth resides with the 
accounting officer.  The Minister may sign as a final 
signatory on the submission that appoints those people. 
 
So that is why I am saying that although you talk to 
the Minister but the Director General had more power, in 
fact even more than the Minister had in terms of making 
those decisions. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, let us try and summarise the 
next section then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So just, Mr Pretorius, just to go back 
whether that first sentence is correct of not.  You are 
saying insofar as it says the Director General of SSA has 
control over the filling of the position, you say that is fine 
and that is correct because you are not saying he has the 
power to fill the position.  The power to fill the position 
vests in the Minister but the Minister in order to fill the 
position must know that there will be money to pay those 
20 
people who will be appointed and the Director General, as 
the accounting officer, is the one who has got to say 
something about this.  So if he is not in support you will 
end up not having appointment. 
DR DINTWE:   That is the proposition that I am making. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 325 of 362 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Well, 
briefly 
if 
you 
would 
summarise what happened in November 2017 in relation to 
appointments. 
DR DINTWE:   Ja.  Now that is good example of then who 
is holding the strings.  I do not know the word power, 
maybe we are using it both sides but who is holding the 
strings.  So in November 2017 I wrote a letter to the 
Director General so I would have spoken to Minister 
Mahlobo who said that in principle I do not have a problem 
10 
so please tell us – give us like the list of the positions that 
you want filled and then I wrote a letter to the Director 
General and Mr Arthur Fraser and I informed him about my 
intention to commence with the recruitment drive.  In other 
words asking him to facilitate that process. 
 
Although those posts were funded, I still required 
Mr Fraser to release the funds in order to fill the post.  
Now they will explain that the CFO – the Chief Financial 
Officer will explain that the money sits somewhere because 
the only money that the release will be for warm bodies.  
20 
So as and when the position remains vacant, the money 
will be somewhere but it will not be readily available.   
So there is only – it was not even asking for 
permission to do that because I know that the permission 
was to be sought from the Minister.  I was informing him 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 326 of 362 
 
that I am starting, may you please release those funds. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   How important were these posts? 
DR DINTWE:   Critical posts, I can remember them from 
the top my head, one of those is what we call OPO.  Now 
OPO is Oversight Principal Officer, they are sitting in my 
Exco because they are component heads of different 
structures in the OIGI.  So you will have an OPO who is 
sitting 
here 
who 
is 
only 
responsible 
from 
Crime 
Intelligence, you will have the other one who is responsible 
for the domestic branch of the SSA, the other one for the 
10 
fallen branch of the SSA, the other one for the defence.  
So these are senior people reporting directly to myself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Critical posts. 
DR DINTWE:   And [indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Can I also mention maybe the IT specialist 
like in my office?  And the majority of the complaints that I 
am getting I mention because the majority of the complaint 
that I am getting will be like I think that I am being 
intercepted unlawfully, I do not where is that camera 
20 
coming from because it is starting to sound like one and 
for me, I cannot depend then on the SSA to see that let us 
check your systems if you have this particular person.  I 
need to have somebody who will have the powers vested 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 327 of 362 
 
on him by the OIGI so that particular – so that is the 
second post [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, what was the response? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second?  I may have missed 
this earlier.  The IGI position, at what level in terms of 
public service is it ranked, if it is ranked at all? 
DR DINTWE:    Oh, alright, alright.  You know unfortunately 
I have to then refer to the conditions of service because 
the condition of service are determined by the President 
and the joint standing committee of Intelligence.  So you 
10 
have a document where you write – all my conditions of 
service are packed at a level of a Deputy Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
DR DINTWE:   And I think that it makes sense because I 
am overseeing Director Generals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, with SAPS it will be a lower rank, 
Lieutenant General. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   [indistinct] it will be also be a Lieutenant 
20 
General. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DR DINTWE:   But SSA, it is a full DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and we will come to that later 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 328 of 362 
 
in relation to certain events that happened during your 
watch as IGI.  But you made an approach to Mr Fraser in 
order to release funds to fill those six critical posts.  What 
was his response? 
DR DINTWE:   May I please read it to the Chairperson, it is 
just a paragraph, it is here.  He writes to me and he says: 
“Regrettably the State Security Agency is unable to 
adhere to your request for funding of the post as 
identified in your letter.  The State Security Agency 
has adopted and endorsed its strategic development 
10 
plan as DP Vision 2035 and as a consequence 
thereof realigned its organisational structure and 
strategy.  This process is underway and in its final 
stages.  Once the final confirmed structure has 
been approved it will inform the recruitment process 
as to what the priorities are in terms of filling of 
vacant posts.” 
Do you see that, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What does that have to do with you? 
DR DINTWE:   Nothing at all, Chairperson.  But this is my 
20 
work and this is a letter that is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Where this guy say no, no, no, no, wait, you 
have got your own strategic what what, you are reporting 
somewhere but I will not be giving you that money until I 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 329 of 362 
 
am done with my own restructuring. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you make that point as to 
the applicability of the strategy development plan to your 
office later on but what do you say about Section 7.12 of 
the Oversight Act in paragraph 41? 
DR DINTWE:   I am saying that there is a serious 
misconception of that particular section because that 
Section empowers the Minister and I have t correct this, 
Chairperson, I would have said in consultations – not in 
consultation with myself, the appointment by the Minister, 
10 
it is after, that is what the Act says.  It is a fine line also.  
But there was a misconception because Section 7.12 of the 
Oversight Act empower the Minister after consultation with 
the 
Inspector 
General 
to 
appoint 
such 
number 
of 
employees to the OIGI as may be necessary for the 
performance of the function of that office and that is 
basically my emphasis.  But again we are trying to draw 
that distinction I think that we talked about to say that who 
is holding the power and who is holding the real power in 
this particular instance? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you refer to the power or duty 
to determine the needs of your office and the personnel 
necessary to discharge its mandate.  Who in the first 
instance should decide there in your view? 
DR DINTWE:   It is the Inspector General, the [indistinct]  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 330 of 362 
 
who have to decide on that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And does the – in your view 
…[intervenes] 
DR DINTWE:   Because – oh, sorry, sorry, Advocate, 
because there is rather there which says that as maybe 
necessary for the performance or the functions of that 
office.  Now the Minister is supposedly sitting somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
you 
know 
the 
operational 
requirements of the office. 
DR DINTWE:   Exactly, I am the one who knows that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   But that provision also does not say that 
she has to make that determination it only says that will 
appoint after consultation with myself. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Does the Director General 
of the SSA in your opinion and on your understanding of 
the law have any power or authority over the process of 
appointment of employees and the substantive decisions in 
relation to that appointment process? 
DR DINTWE:   Not at all, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And then you make the 
point 
in 
paragraph 
43 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
strategic 
development plan which was cited by Mr Fraser as being a 
reason not to or to delay the appointment, not to appoint or 
to delay the appointments that you required.  Is it correct 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 331 of 362 
 
that you, as the office of the Inspector General have your 
own Vision 2022, as you referred to it? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Honourable Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you – is your office in any way 
subordinated to the strategy development plan of the SSA? 
DR DINTWE:   Not at all, it does not even affect the 
members who are sitting in the OIGI.  Even if there is a 
restructuring they will never ever come closer to them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and you …[intervenes] 
DR DINTWE:   Because they are not even appointed in 
10 
terms of the same legislation.  Staff in my office are 
appointed in terms of the Oversight Act where as they use 
Intelligence Services Act to appoint members of the SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And let us put it at its 
mildest, you use strong language here but in your view is it 
appropriate that the head of an Intelligence service over 
which you have oversight and service which must account 
to you to determine how you should recruit staff or when 
you should recruit staff? 
DR DINTWE:   I prefer to call it irrational. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DR DINTWE:   Not in the legal sense but [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And how does it affect your 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 332 of 362 
 
independence?   
DR DINTWE:   Yes because I cannot find a reason, I 
cannot fathom the reason that is why I am saying that it is 
unreasonable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   It is wrong for all reasons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say in paragraph 44 by 
way of summary and conclusion: 
“So long as the budgetary allocation of the OIGI 
10 
remains within the purview of the SSA these lines of 
control over the functioning of the OIGI will remain 
blurred providing evidence that it is inimical to the 
interest mandate and independence of the OIGI that 
it be subsumed under the office of the SSA.” 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that your view? 
DR DINTWE:   That is my view. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In this context the independence of 
the office of the IGI is confirmed and guaranteed in terms 
20 
of the legislation, the governing legislative framework, in 
fact including the Constitution, correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The question may arise and it is 
illustrative of a view that notwithstanding the existence of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 333 of 362 
 
an oversight body, there are matters that are so sensitive 
that secrecy must be preserved at all costs.  In other 
words, there are some documents that you should not 
have, there are some things that you should not know, that 
should not get into any private hands.  What do you say 
about that? 
DR DINTWE:   I will request, Chairperson, that the 
question be repeated, I think I missed something. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, there may be a view, it has 
not been expressed as such but almost as such that there 
10 
are certain matters that fall within State Security that are 
so sensitive that they should remain secret at all cost and 
should never be revealed outside the purview of the SSA 
and that follows that you should not have access to certain 
information. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, we have several examples to show that 
even written letters to the effect that you cannot have 
information with regard to this particular issue.  So yes, of 
course, there will be that continuous resistance.  They are 
very clever, we call it managed access because they know 
20 
it is a criminal offence.  So you will request this document 
three times and by the fourth time when you want to cross 
the street and go to Garsfontein police station they will 
give that document to yourself.  That will be after many 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 334 of 362 
 
attempts so it defeats the efficiency of this office.  So yes, 
of course. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  You have referred to the 
provisions of the Oversight Act which say very clearly that 
you must access to all information premises and the like 
and it cannot be refused on any grounds provided it is 
within – it is deemed by you to be part of your function. 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Have those provisions been 
followed uniformly and consistently in your experience? 
10 
DR DINTWE:   No, not at all.  Not in all cases, that is what 
I wanted to say. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and paragraphs 45 to 48 you 
deal with the budgetary issues.  We have dealt with those 
in questions and answers today already.  Do you need to 
expand anything there?  Can we move on? 
DR DINTWE:   No, not really, I think, Chairperson, I have 
made I think my point there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  You have under the head 
Recommendations made certain comments in paragraph 
20 
49, would you share those with the Chair please? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I am making recommendations to say 
that there are problems with the oversight, Oversight Act 
and the previous JSCI as the current one asked me 
previously to say that I should share with them what I think 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 335 of 362 
 
need to be dealt with.  But there was another process that 
was taking place in parliament to address two issues as 
issues with regard to all oversight bodies.   
The first one was the funding because almost 
everyone in the oversight was not happy about the funding, 
to say that how do they remove it from the administrative 
department so that there are not problems.   
 
But the second one was - we were informed that 
there is committee, that they used the word ploughing, that 
is ploughing through all the legislations and an explanation 
10 
that was given was that the researchers in parliament 
realised that some of the acts of parliament were passed 
like in a rush [indistinct], so they said that a lot of them 
needed to be revisited. 
 
The recommendations that I am making there are 
with regard to the oversight, the Oversight Act and I am 
making two distinct ones there if you will allow me to 
continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 49? 
DR DINTWE:   49.1 and 49.2, yes.  49.1 I say: 
20 
“The Public Service Act needs to incorporate the 
OIGI as a national department distinct from the SSA 
and secondly, the Oversight Act to make allowance 
for the funding of the OIGI from an independent 
source 
not 
aligned 
to 
the 
SSA 
or 
any 
other 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 336 of 362 
 
Intelligence service.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now is this the first time that these 
issues have been canvassed or deliberated on? 
DR DINTWE:   Not really.  In fact, Chairperson, I think you 
will be surprised to hear that the high level review on – I 
mean panel, just quoted those recommendations which 
were made by the two panels that were established.  Can I 
go through them?  The first one is at 2006, I must just see 
where they are. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To assist you we have extracted a 
10 
summary, it is in a declassified document which deals with 
the two reports, the 2006 report and the Matthews report.  
If I may, Chair, these do have reference numbers, they are 
in another file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Registrar please… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But for the sake of convenience we 
have extracted them now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For the record however, Chair, they 
are in bundle YY2 at page 32.31 to 32.40 and we will refer 
20 
to those page numbers.  If we could go please to page 
32.136. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You will see there at paragraph 
13.2.2 this document deals with the Inspector General for 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 337 of 362 
 
Intelligence and it is an extract from the report of the high 
level review panel on the SSA.  It reads: 
“The recent controversy between the IGI and the 
former DG of SSA around the withdrawal of the IGI 
security clearance has raised once more an issue 
that has been on the Intelligence community’s 
agenda 
for 
some 
years. 
 
The 
issue 
of 
the 
independence of the office of the IGI from one of 
the entities that it oversees.” 
Now we will deal with that issue in due course. 
10 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It goes on to say: 
“The 2006 report of the task team on the review of 
Intelligence-related 
legislation 
regulation 
and 
policies had this to say on the matter.” 
And if you go over the page, it reads: 
“While this may be administratively [word cut] of the 
need for actual and perceived independence this 
arrangement is untenable.  It is therefore important 
to provide OIGI with an organisational status that 
20 
gets its head accounting officer status and allows it 
to receive and manage its budget independently of 
the NIA.” 
That is the precursor to the SSA, do you see that? 
DR DINTWE:   I see that; I confirm that Chairperson. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 338 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then it refers to the 2008 
Matthews Commission Report, which agreed with the 
findings of the 2006 report and I quote: 
“The task team recommended that the OIGI be 
given independent organisational status, allowing it 
to receive and manage its budget independently of 
the NIA and affording the Inspector General full 
control over the resources and activities of the 
office.  The OIGI could be established as either a 
government 
agency 
or 
a 
schedule 
three 
10 
organisation in terms of the Public Service Act.  The 
Inspector 
General 
would 
remain 
functionally 
accountable to the JSCI but would be financially 
and administratively accountable to the Minister for 
Intelligence Services for the purposes of the Public 
Finance Management Act.” 
And then it concludes in that regard to say, and I quote: 
“We agree that the OIGI should have independent 
status. The process of establishing the status was 
underway in August 2008.” 
20 
And then the report of the high level review panel 
concludes having quoted the 2006 panel and the Matthews 
Commission concludes: 
“In fact, the process to establish the status has 
never happened or at least was put aside with the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 339 of 362 
 
change in intelligence management in 2009.” 
And then two paragraphs down it says: 
“According to the then SSA Director General Arthur 
Fraser there had been no surveillance of the IGI, he 
was spotted meeting opposition parties.  He said 
the IGI report on pan was leaked to the Daily 
Maverick. He claimed that it was the current 
Minister who instructed him to withdraw the IGI 
security clearance.” 
Now 
I 
just 
mentioned 
that 
part 
now 
because 
that 
10 
foreshadows evidence that you were going to give in due 
course.  
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But let us leave that aside at the 
moment that appears to have been some of the focus of 
the high level review panel. But the recommendations of 
the 2006 panel and the Matthews Commission in 2008, 
have they ever been implemented? 
DR DINTWE:   They have never been implemented 
Chairperson I think I need to mention that there is a letter 
20 
in my possession which showed that during the tenure of 
Minister Kasrils that letter was written to the then Minister 
of Public Service, the former Minister Geraldine Fraser- 
Moleketi and in principle, she had responded saying that, 
yes, of course the request made by Minister Kasrils make 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 340 of 362 
 
sense. 
So she wanted to establish a work stream, they 
called it that was going to deal with the whole process and 
take it further, but then it died a natural death.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   While we here it is relevance will 
become clear later, in relation to the withdrawal of your 
security clearance.  The conclusion of the panel, that is a 
high level review panel is – or the non-conclusion is on 
page 032.138.  The last sentence of the first paragraph 
reads: 
10 
“The panel was not able to ascertain whether 
Frasers withdrawal of the IGI security clearance 
was an attempt to obstruct the IGI’s investigation of 
himself.” 
That is investigation of Arthur Fraser, but we will get to 
that evidence in due course, I just want to highlight it here. 
So that when we refer to that matter, we know what the 
high level review panel said or did not say about that 
issue.  
But further down that page, that is 032.138 they 
20 
summarise, that is the high level review panel summarises 
the 2006 Task Team Report and they there under five 
bullets. And the first bullet is important and I am not going 
to read them all: 
“The task team agrees that the office of the 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 341 of 362 
 
Inspector General for Intelligence should be given 
independent status, allowing the Inspector General 
to have full control over the resources and activities 
of the OIGI.” 
That was the finding, and am I correct when you stated 
earlier, this is one of the findings that has not been 
implemented? 
DR DINTWE:   It has not been implemented and maybe I 
should remark here before it slips my mind to say that this 
is a document which was declassified by the President, and 
10 
it was then it was made a public I mean it was then turned 
into - I do not know if, to call it an instruction.  
So the high level, the HLRP reports, this one here, 
can no longer be seen as mere recommendations, because 
the President says, get a team together and implement 
these recommendations as they are but yes, of course, all 
those recommendations are not yet implemented two years 
down the line. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and in relation to the original 
report, 15 years down the line.  
20 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, but Chairperson may I please also 
mention this, and you will bear with me?  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sure.  
DR DINTWE:   I know that I could be seen as arrogant in 
that, you are supposed to leading me.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 342 of 362 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I have no power in that regard.  
DR DINTWE:   Alright, thank you very much.  The 
recommendation 
of 
the 
President 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
Constitution, could have a binding effect and become 
enforceable, even if it is a policy and that is in terms of 
Section 85, sub-section 2, I think it is B, which says that 
the top part will say that the President may develop a 
national policy in conjunction with the members of his 
cabinet.  
But sub-paragraph B talks something about the 
10 
enforceability of such a policy.  Maybe that could really 
assist our position in terms of that myth as well but I did 
not want to take it further than that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, and then certainly in respect 
of the Matthews Commission Report, that finding that we 
have just quoted was endorsed, although the high level 
review panel shows in what respects the two reports 
differed, that finding that the Inspector General's office 
should be given independent status is common to both 
reports, am I correct? 
20 
DR DINTWE:   It is actually three, not even both, the 2006 
2008 as well as the HLRP. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   HLRP, well what he said on page - 
because I am not I think the - as I read the report of the 
high level review panel, there were somewhat equivocal on 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 343 of 362 
 
the findings of the two previous panels but I do not want 
you to debate those they are here in black and white.  But 
they do make the point on page 032.139 of Y2, that over a 
decade and I quote: 
“Over a decade has passed since these two sets 
of…[intervene].” 
DR DINTWE:   I am sorry Chairperson I did not get the 
paragraph there.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is the first paragraph on page 
032.139 of the document of the high level review panel that 
10 
I have just put in front of you.  
DR DINTWE:   Okay, I am there yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So you go to page 032.139 on top 
of the page it reads: 
“Over a decade has passed since these two sets of 
findings on the OIGI were made by a Ministerial 
appointed entities.  It appears to the panel that with 
the change in administration in 2009 there was no 
follow up on these recommendations. The panel 
understands, however, that there has been an 
20 
attempt to draft and promulgate the regulations 
governing the OIGI these were drafted in 2010 and 
submitted to the then Minister Thwele and the JCI 
but it was decided to put these on hold until the 
promulgation of the GILA the Act which amended all 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 344 of 362 
 
related intelligence legislation to provide for the 
establishment of the SSA.” 
Is that correct? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I can see that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and of course - and in any 
event, we know that even since then, the independence of 
the OIGI has not been secured, as recommended by those, 
well two or three, those entities. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I agree with that statement and maybe 
one 
needs 
to 
also 
remark 
that 
the 
institutions 
of 
10 
government are destroyed by the government.  I do not 
know if it is herself or himself but you have got this very, 
very, very good concept of how oversights should be 
conducted 
and 
so 
forth 
but 
then 
you 
frustrate 
this 
organisation. 
Even before my arrival. I like this report, because it 
takes it back before my arrival. So you can see that my 
predecessors were also contending with the same issues 
and it brings you to your knees, to be honest.  I mean, if 
you are not given the money and so forth, you come there, 
20 
you are excited, you say I am going to serve the country, I 
am going to assist them.  But Chairperson, I am there for 
four years and I do not think that I am going to wait any 
day longer when this term comes to an end, I am just trying 
to survive, because you come there with your skills and 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 345 of 362 
 
what happens.  I mean, you can see that my predecessors 
including myself have failed to turn around this oversight 
structure.  That is how frustrating it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, if we could go a little 
further and deal with the high level review panel report 
under this heading.  In the second paragraph on page 
032.139 the panel, that is the high level review panel 
report reads: 
“One of the key concerns of the panel is the long 
periods of time that the IGI post has been vacant.” 
10 
And then it specifies what you have already told the Chair 
but it was a concern expressed by the panel. 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, that is correct, it was expressed by the 
panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then the penultimate paragraph on 
that page foreshadows a question that you will deal with in 
due course and I am going to read it to you: 
“A question - or read it onto the record, a question 
of concern to the panel was, to what extent the 
OIGI had played a role in identifying and curbing 
20 
the abuses that had occurred in recent years in the 
SSA. Of course, the fact that the post was vacant 
for two years at a crucial time did not help however 
the panel did have sight of a number of IGI reports 
on the abuses, such as the report on the principle 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 346 of 362 
 
agent network, and others, which indeed identify 
problems and recommend corrective action.  But as 
far as the panel could ascertain, no action or 
consequent management took place in response to 
the IGI’s reports.  This raises the question as to 
whether the services should be obliged to act on 
the findings and recommendations of the IGI similar 
to the status of the recommendations of the Public 
Protector, this would need further thought.” 
What is important about this paragraph is it does seek to 
10 
explain the question that may legitimately be asked, where 
was the IGI?  And of course, the answer to that question 
may well lie in the certificates you referred to earlier.  Do 
you recall and the various reports, would you like to 
expand on that paragraph please? 
DR DINTWE:   Thank you very much.  Chairperson, if I 
started earlier it would be just to say that no one and no 
one in the intelligence where I play an oversight role 
should come and mislead you by saying that we are not 
aware.   
20 
The 
certificates 
are 
comprehensive 
documents, 
which deals with even a transaction worth about R60, 00 or 
70 if it did not happen in accordance with our prescripts, 
so I do that.  So I would have included that, I would have 
included all the information and this is how the certificates 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 347 of 362 
 
travels.  I sent first to all three Ministers and I solicit 
inputs, obviously those inputs are also not even legislated 
but it is a novel thing that I introduced when I got there but 
they have got an opportunity to convince me otherwise.  
So I will then incorporate those, that I think that 
they have a point and then I will finalise the certificate and 
then I will send to the Ministers again. We have been doing 
it religiously, we have got records of that, we have got 
covering letters and then I will go and present to the 
committee as well, religiously doing that, so no one should 
10 
ever claim that we are not aware and I think that the high 
level panel is also confirming that, saying that although 
they say that they lacked independent but you have seen 
their reports and those reports are instrumental in using 
them ...[indistinct], because oversight should not replace 
the internal controls, that cannot, I cannot run the SSA, I 
cannot run Crime Intelligence, what I can do is to point 
them to this ...[indistinct] as well as you know look both in 
the internal controls and what I am responsible to oversee 
is as to whether they develop internal controls and whether 
20 
they implement that. 
And I think OUTA General will also be doing the 
same principle follow the same principle, to say there is a 
problem here, deal with it, whether you charge the person 
or whatever, so that is what the HLRP Chairperson is also 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 348 of 362 
 
confirming to say that but there are reports there which are 
comprehensive enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now obviously what you are, what you 
have just said definitely relates to the period that you have 
been there, so I want to ask the question whether because 
you have – you may have access to previous annual 
reports or certificates that were given or issued by your 
predecessors and those before them, whether you know 
that those reports were given in the same way as you have 
been doing them, namely every year if that is the position 
10 
and they are given to the same people and bodies. 
DR DINTWE:   I have that evidence to show that there’s 
continuity in that office, there is continuity because the 
rest of the staff members are appointed permanently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
DR DINTWE:   So when I got into that office there was 
something that they didn’t bring 2015/2016 financial year 
and even before that, I have – I have had an opportunity to 
also engage with those certificates you know when I was 
...[indistinct] I acclimatised myself with that office, very 
20 
much comprehensive, hard-hitting, show you exactly where 
the problems are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it’s the fact that you say you have 
given reports, reports have been given even before your 
time, you know annually pointing out abuses and problems 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 349 of 362 
 
that should have been fixed, but it seems nothing was fixed 
in terms of what was pointed out or maybe very little was 
fixed is concerning because the evidence I have heard 
seems to suggest also that talking about Parliament it 
would have been given, the Auditor General’s reports about 
various government departments and SOE’s and yet in 
terms of how it used those reports in respect of the SOE’s 
about which I have had a lot of evidence of corruption, you 
are not sure what happens, but apart from that Boards of 
SOE’s as well as cabinet, Ministers responsible for certain 
10 
SOE’s, about whom I have had a lot of corruption going 
you know spreading over a number of years one thinks that 
they would have been given reports every year of the state 
of affairs in those SOE’s, but when I hear the evidence that 
I have been hearing in terms of what happened over a 
number of years it is like nobody bothers to read those 
reports, and the problems continue. 
 
I mean I was hearing evidence from the former 
Group CEO of PRASA today with regard to PRASA, I have 
heard evidence where the late Auditor General pointed out 
20 
how irregular expenditure was going up astronomically 
every year and it looked like nobody was doing anything 
about this, so maybe there is a problem in South Africa 
that people don’t read reports and act on them, because 
the kinds of abuses that I have heard about in regard to 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 350 of 362 
 
SSA don’t suggest that anybody was aware of the problems 
because anybody who was aware of those problems and 
didn’t do anything really needs to relook at themselves.  
DR DINTWE:   I know where the problem is Chairperson, if 
you will allow me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
DR DINTWE:   And something which is not insurmountable.   
It is because you have got a body such as ours and you 
only give them the power of recommendation.  We have a 
position and I was thinking that maybe that could be like a 
10 
legacy project; to take myself to court and argue that I 
don’t think that recommendations can just be ignored.  I 
know that the answer is going to be that they are not 
remedial, they are not remedial measures, but I don’t think 
that any government in its right mind will throw money into 
this particular organisation and this organisation only 
keeps on doing recommendations which are ignored you 
know at such a shoe space and nothing happens, so there 
is no power of recourse, and because I always keep 
evidence that I would have elevated this matter to the next 
20 
level 
whether 
it 
is 
committee 
most 
of 
the 
times, 
I 
sometimes even go to the President, I have gone to the 
previous President, I have gone to the current President 
and made them aware of things that are happening in 
Intelligence Services, so this thing of recommendation 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 351 of 362 
 
versus remedial measures I think that it creates serious 
problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you say you went to the 
previous President, Mr Jacob Zuma, and you have been to 
the current President to tell them about these problems, 
one, are you talking about the problems which are 
highlighted in your annual reports? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes it was most. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe more, but certainly those? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and when you do that would you 
bring the reports with you or not really? 
DR DINTWE:   Ja, I will make a presentation Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You would make a presentation. 
DR DINTWE:  A presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which is based on your annual reports? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you do that yearly going to the 
President or it is an ad hoc arrangement? 
DR DINTWE:   It is an ad hoc arrangement because the 
20 
legislation does not put him in the scheme of things as 
...[indistinct] are concerned, its status are sent to the 
ministers 
who 
shall 
cause 
them 
to 
be 
sent 
to 
the 
Committee on Intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 352 of 362 
 
DR DINTWE:   But if you look at the definition of a Minister 
Advocate Pretorius on the Oversight Act it says the 
Minister shall refer to the State President or any other 
member of cabinet appointed in terms of I think Section 
189 and so forth, so it is an ad hoc thing in fact that would 
be my answer.   I have done it once unfortunately with the 
current President and only once with the former President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   Okay, but the Joint 
Committee on Intelligence in Parliament do you know what 
it does with these reports that you give them annually? 
10 
DR 
DINTWE: 
 
What 
I 
was 
informed 
is 
that 
the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...whether it takes any action, I know 
that some of the things, or maybe everything that it 
deliberates on is not something one can talk about, but to 
your knowledge does it take any action to deal with the 
problems? 
DR DINTWE:   Not the previous committee and with the 
current committee I will be honest with you, the time that I 
have worked with them is not sufficient for me to create a 
20 
pattern or to make an opinion, to be honest they seem very 
much eager you know to follow these, I have never ever 
had a member of parliament telling me to slow down a little 
bit because the environment is too complex, and it is an 
environment 
where 
you 
deal 
with 
different 
piece 
of 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 353 of 362 
 
legislation and so forth, so I will not be able – but the 
previous I don’t remember getting anything significant that 
they would have done to assist, but I keep on elevating to 
them and making them aware of these challenges. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Well I see we are at 
quarter past eight, we were supposed to talk at eight 
o’clock about whether we go further or not.  From your side 
Mr Pretorius will you still be fine to go up to nine, or ... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well if you are asking my opinion I 
will be honest Chair ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are obliged to be honest. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Or I won’t be deferential. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you would like to stop now or at a 
different stage? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well there are just one or two 
issues I would like to deal with that shouldn’t take very 
long, and then my view, but I am subject to your direction 
Chair, I am capable of going till nine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   I was going to be very 
much guided by how the staff and the technicians feel but I 
20 
think because you are the only one standing in the room 
when you indicate as you do I should allow that we – but 
maybe if we – so maybe if you do what you think you 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My quickest close-off Chair, I think 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 354 of 362 
 
that last consideration is perhaps decisive.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, well I told them, you must 
have heard me earlier on say ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...but maybe the staff said hey he is 
abusing us. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
alright, 
but 
they 
are 
very 
committed.   Okay I think let’s round off.   My concern was 
simply that I was hoping that we would do enough to give 
10 
us the comfort that tomorrow we should be able to finish 
with 
his 
evidence, 
but 
the 
other 
considerations 
are 
important so let us wrap up and then we see tomorrow. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, the document which is the 
extract from the high level review panel at page YY232.139 
does mention in the paragraph we have just referred to the 
status of the findings and the panel says in the last 
sentence: 
“This raises the question as to whether the services 
should be obliged to act on the findings and 
20 
recommendations of the IGI, similar to the status of 
the recommendations of the Public Protector.” 
This 
would 
need 
further 
thought 
and 
it 
is 
perhaps 
something that Chair will consider and you have given your 
view in that regard, but also in that paragraph in line 5 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 355 of 362 
 
mention is made of the fact that the panel did have sight of 
a number of IGI reports on abuses such as the report on 
the principal agent network.  Did you or your predecessor 
or one of your predecessors adduce an IGI report on the 
principal agent network, as opposed to the internal report 
of the SSA, that is correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct, it was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember to articulate your answer 
because when you nod that is not recorded. 
DR DINTWE:   Oh Chairperson, sorry about that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So there would have been an 
internal panel report and there would have been an IGI 
report on the principal agent network, am I correct? 
DR DINTWE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright now that report have you 
seen that report? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, I have seen that report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, and it would be within your 
province to give it to the Chair or not? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, we are the ones who produce that 
20 
report ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, now what I wanted to ask to 
whom would such a report go in the ordinary course.  Do 
you know to whom the report went?   
DR DINTWE:   No I know where it went after I have done a 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 356 of 362 
 
lot of work on that, I was briefed fully on that because 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To whom did it go? 
DR DINTWE:   Yes, but this is how it started, how it started 
is very important.   It was a ministerial task in terms of the 
Oversight Act.  Siyabonga Twele after the SSA had 
concluded its own report and they went to the then Minister 
of Justice and the Minister of Justice said oh, there is a lot 
of you know criminality in this particular report.  Please 
sent it to the SIU at that particular point and I think the 
10 
Hawks if I am not mistaken, it could have been Scorpions, I 
am not sure.  
 
But he then wrote a letter to the OIGI, giving them 
terms of reference.  So he wanted them to investigate 
some other things.  So the planned report which belongs or 
which was produced by the OIGI will be confined to 
specific issues which were in the terms of reference.  
 
That is the reason why because the Act then forces 
the IGI to report back for the tasking authority.  If it is the 
president you go back, if it is the minister you go back.  So 
20 
there were several presentation that were made to the, for 
all the ministers, to several ministers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Several ministers.  Can you recall 
which ministers?   
MR DINTWE:  It will have been presented to Minister 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 357 of 362 
 
Siyabonga Twele, but when Minister Mahlobo came, it was 
presented to him.  The information that was given to me 
during 
briefing, 
is 
that 
it 
was 
done 
twice 
but 
the 
documentary proof that I have is that it was only done 
once.  
 
So I will have like a presentation with the date, but 
I also have an official in the office who says that I was part 
and parcel of that, and I do not have a problem to come up 
with an affidavit to confirm that it was presented.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, well perhaps you could help 
10 
us in that regard.  Would the former president have been 
briefed?   
MR DINTWE:  Yes, no I really have to check that 
Chairperson.     
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, do not give an answer that 
you cannot substantiate later.  
MR DINTWE:  Ja.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Then just finally in relation to this 
document, at the bottom of the page the high level review 
panel state: 
20 
 
“The IGI noted that there were a series of 
legacy issues from previous certifications that 
remained unaddressed.  These included the 
following.” 
 
And the first bullet reads: 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 358 of 362 
 
 
“The involvement of the Minister of State 
Security 
and 
Operational 
Work, 
an 
administrative decision making of the SSA.” 
 
Over the page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, before you go over the page.  
Mr Dintwe, do you know which Minister of State Security 
they are referring to? 
MR DINTWE:  It is Minister David Mahlobo.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then halfway down, there are a 
10 
number of bullets.  I am not going to read them all.  
Halfway down there is a bullet which reads: 
 
“There is a culture of non-accountability in the 
SSA.” 
 
Was that a concern that you know was addressed to 
the high level review panel? 
MR DINTWE:  That is correct yes, it was our concern.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right, and then at the bottom of 
that paragraph: 
 
“This 
long 
list 
of 
issues 
that 
remained 
20 
unaddressed 
includes 
many 
of 
the 
issues 
identified by the panel and suggests that the 
IGI was not being taken seriously by the SSA.” 
 
Is that a view that you share or disagree with? 
MR DINTWE:  It is a view that I share, that the office was 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 359 of 362 
 
never, and even now taken seriously and Chairperson, 
these are the issues that I am comfortable addressing, 
because they belong to prior to, or they came to the fore 
prior to my tenure and it will be reports that I received and 
so forth, but again even evidence which just shows that we 
have since told you that ministers for instance should not 
involve themselves in operational matters, but you will 
have incidents where the minister would have you know, 
was involved in those issues.  
 
So those are the issues that I based on what was 
10 
given to me during the briefings, but it also materialised 
under my own tenure.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay, and then finally our team has 
produced a document on the status and source of the MIST 
document, the minimum information security standards.   
The source is the public service regulations published or 
promulgated in terms of the Public Services Act of 1994.  
 
Chapter 5 of those regulations deals with electronic 
government regulations.  Part 2 of Chapter 5 deals with 
information security and Part B of Part 2 deals with the 
20 
minimum information security standards, and there is a 
section which obliges the minister in consultation with the 
Minister of Intelligence to issue minimum information 
security standards for the public service in the form of a 
hand book.  
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 360 of 362 
 
 
That was adopted by cabinet on 4 December 2996.  
So in summary it is a standard for minimum information 
security measures that any institution must put in place for 
sensitive or classified information in order to protect 
national security and its source is in regulation and is 
therefore binding.  
 
Chair, if I can just hand that up.  We will include it 
in the bundle in due course.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, no that is fine, and then the ... 
then the MIST itself, if one could get, I do not know 
10 
whether 
there 
are 
different 
MIST’s 
or 
there 
is 
this 
document based on what Mr Pretorius has just read there.  
It looks like different ministers can produce different 
documents of this nature under their department.  
MR DINTWE:  No, there is a base document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   
MR DINTWE:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Which applies to ...[intervenes]  
MR 
DINTWE: 
 
Yes, 
which 
apply 
to 
all 
government 
departments.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We will provide it Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay yes.  
MR DINTWE:  Which happened to deal with information 
which is sensitive in nature.   
CHAIRPERSON:  How thick is that document?   
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 361 of 362 
 
MR DINTWE:  It is very short.  I remember that it runs up 
to about paragraph 46 or so.  It is not a thick document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR DINTWE:  Yes, at least by my standards.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We will provide that we put it in the 
bundle Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is available on the internet.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Okay.  Was that your last 
...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  We are 
going to end here for the day.  The arrangement of course 
as I understand it is that you will come back tomorrow 
evening Dr Dintwe.   
MR DINTWE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to be here at four o’clock, but 
accepting that we might only be able to start at five, but if 
we 
are 
able 
to 
start 
at 
four, 
then 
that 
would 
be 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, I am informed that the MIST 
document is in the legal framework document that you 
have.  It is at tab 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Okay, thank you.  Okay, we 
are going to then adjourn.  Thank you to everybody, thank 
20 APRIL 2021 – DAY 378 
 
Page 362 of 362 
 
you to the staff and the technicians and everybody.  Thank 
you to you Dr Dintwe.  Thank you Mr Pretorius and your 
team and the investigators for making it possible for the 
commission to sit until this time.  
 
Mr Pretorius, if I could see you in chambers briefly 
after we adjourn? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNED TO 21 APRIL 2021 
