 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
15 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 329 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 102 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
15 JANUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 3 of 102 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 15 JANUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  We are ready Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson today is the hearing of or 
the leading of testimony of Mr Brian Molefe.  Mr Molefe is 
legally 
represented. 
 
I 
would 
allow 
the 
legal 
10 
representatives to place themselves on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes they may do that either from where 
they are seated if they put on the – if – ja there is no they 
can go to the podium.  Somebody must just sanitise before 
they go there. 
ADV MASUKU: Deputy Chief Justice together with Mr 
Tsheppe and Mr Sikhakhane on the instructions of Mr – of 
Molefe Attorneys.  We appear for Mr Brian Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you very much Mr Masuku.  
Yes Mr Seleka. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson 
Mr Molefe is here I envisage that he is ready to take the 
oath or affirmation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Good morning Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  Good morning Chairperson. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 4 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Please administer the oath 
or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MOLEFE:  Brian Molefe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the 
proscribed affirmation? 
MR MOLEFE:  No objections. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth. 
MR MOLEFE:  I will. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  The whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, I truly 
affirm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I truly affirm.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you; you may be seated. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson the bundle we will be using 
is Exhibit Eskom Bundle 17 – 17 Exhibit U38.  Exhibit U38 
that is where you find Mr Molefe’s affidavit together with 
20 
the annexures.  Mr Molefe I will ask you to go there as 
well.  Oh my learned friend Mr Masuku seeks to put certain 
things on record Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you – I was expecting you to first 
indicate for the benefit for the public where Mr – what Mr 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 5 of 102 
 
Molefe will be testifying. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About – he will be questioned about and 
so that the public will follow.  Maybe you should do that 
and then once you are done with that Mr Masuku can 
address me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes Mr Molefe I 
should say at the outset that his names features in many 
things.  A couple of issues from Transnet to Eskom and to 
Parliament but his called by the Eskom work stream 
10 
Chairperson to focus on matters that pertain Eskom. 
 
And that deals with Mr Molefe’s secondment – how 
he was seconded to Tran – to Eskom from Transnet.  Deals 
with Mr Molefe’s decision making in regard to what he 
found to be the cooperation agreement and the fourth 
addendum between Eskom and Optimum.  How he dealt 
with that.  He will explain in regard to the decisions he 
made. 
 
And to the extent that he can and I know that he 
was not personally involved in certain decisions regarding 
20 
the 
two 
pre-payments 
decisions. 
 
The 
R1.68 
billion 
decision that was made by the board and the R659 million 
pre-payment decision made by the board. 
 
He can explain to the extent he can and he will also 
deal with the penalties that were – that Eskom sought to 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 6 of 102 
 
impose against OCM and how that matter ultimately got 
resolved. 
 
Together with that Chairperson is the interaction 
between Eskom and the DMR on the one hand and in 
particular the approach Mr Molefe and Dr Ngubane makes 
to Mr Ramatlhodi in regard to that. 
 
Mr Molefe has indicated to me that he would like to 
traverse other issues particularly in regard to the PP – the 
Public Protectors Report but he will do so in due course. 
 
Chairperson there are other matters that might crop 
10 
up during the – the leading of his evidence and if Mr 
Molefe is not ready on those we have indicated or agreed 
with him that he would ask for your permission to either file 
an affidavit seek for more time in order to deal with those 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well one – the one matter which you – 
should be mentioned is that he will come back at some 
stage to deal with matters relating to Transnet. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So generally speaking today he will not 
20 
be dealing with Transnet matters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 7 of 102 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is correct I have conveyed that 
much also to Mr Molefe and the legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  Then Masuku can 
address me if he wishes to address me. 
ADV MASUKU:  Deputy Chief Justice thank you for 
allowing me to raise these preliminary issues.  They are 
raised not to create the impression that something is 
wrong. 
 
But in a process like this these issues ought to be 
raised so that the process is then reached and it is – it is 
10 
made a little stronger. 
 
I have been asked to raise – I have been asked and 
have a duty to raise those issues which concern – which 
concern the appearance of the Mr Brian. 
 
The first is that Eskom has a – has filed a civil 
claim to the amount of I think of R3 billion against Mr Brian 
and I think eleven other defendants on the very issues that 
will be canvassed by the commission today. 
 
So to the extent that some of the issues – some of 
the questions may undermine his defence in the civil claim 
20 
we might raise an objection.  We hope it does not have to 
come to that – to that level but he would be entitled to 
raise a defence on the basis that this would – it is not – it 
is – it would be unfair in light of the – in light of the 
pending litigation that is going on on the very same issues 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 8 of 102 
 
that he is canvassing. 
 
The second one you will be aware Chief Justice that 
the President has made a proclamation I think it was 2019 
if I am not wrong in respect of which a full scale 
investigation was – or was ordered by the President the 
SIU must conduct in relation to the Eskom matters. 
 
And we – Mr Molefe informs us that he has been 
informed that there are people who worked with him have 
been asked for affidavits in relation to that investigation 
and at some point the SIU or whoever is investigating this 
10 
issue will confront Mr Molefe on the – on those aspects. 
 
We would ask that where it is possible his right to – 
his right to not incriminate himself be respected if it is 
raised legitimately and we hope we do raise it legitimately. 
 
And then the last issue really is an issue of – you 
know if – having been here a number times Chief Justice if 
I do not complain it is just not right.  So I am going to 
complain about… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are going to complain? 
ADV MASUKU:  Yes.  I am going to complain about the fact 
20 
that we did receive the documents on which Mr Molefe had 
to prepare for this hearing quite late – it was on Tuesday – 
Tuesday night. 
 
We as legal representatives were able to access 
those documents the following day which was a Wednesday 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 9 of 102 
 
and we only really had Wednesday and Thursday and part 
of – well today is Friday to go through the documents that 
had been sent to it. 
 
It does create a problem for Mr Molefe because one 
of the questions we had asked quite early was which 
aspect – in which – in respect of which position was the 
commission seeking to have Mr Molefe come and testify?   
 
Because the – the I think it is the Regulation 10.3 
Notice does not really point out that he is fact testifying on 
the Eskom issues and that issue became clearer when we 
10 
received the letter that I commended and the letter by Mr 
Seleka which was a very polite and very fruitful letter to 
engage with. 
 
So we do want to say that there is invariably 
prejudice that relates to the detail that he may require from 
Mr Molefe in respect of the issues that he got documents 
late on. 
 
So in that respect we would ask that if he does say 
that he has not engaged with certain aspects of your 
question that you allow him the opportunity to do so in 
20 
writing after having gotten enough time with his lawyers to 
engage with those questions that you would be wishing him 
to engage with. 
 
So because I mean subject to any questions that 
you may to just assist those are the remarks that I thought 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 10 of 102 
 
are important to record so that we understand the context 
in which Mr Molefe is going to be giving his evidence. 
 
It is the context of a civil and criminal liability that 
he is facing and the context in which the documents had 
been sent to him by the commission and the limited time 
that he had to prepare for those documents. 
 
Absolutely the final one Chief Justice he does want 
to have this – he has a statement that he wants to make in 
which he – it may clarify his mind about the things that the 
commission is investigating.  If it is permitted Mr Brian is 
10 
ready to give that statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you Mr Masuku.  I think to the 
extent that he may have received certain documents late 
and therefore has not had an adequate opportunity to 
prepare himself on certain documents or issues there will 
be no difficulty where he is not able to answer because he 
needs more time to look at those documents.   
There will be no difficulty in arranging that he can 
deal with those at some other time or he might file an 
affidavit and then he might be asked questions when he 
20 
comes back as I indicate he must still come back to deal 
with non-Eskom matters. 
 
So there will be no difficulty.  Every effort is made 
to make sure that there is fairness.  We might not always 
succeed but we will keep on trying to make sure. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 11 of 102 
 
 
So there will no – no difficulty in regard to 
documents that he really has not had enough time to look 
at because the commission gave him those late. 
 
With regard to the question of criminal matters and 
the fact that he may in regard to some question wish to not 
to give an answer in order not to incriminate himself that if 
and when that is raised we will all deal with it then. 
 
Whether or not anything that may fall under the civil 
action but not under the privilege not to incriminate 
yourself whether or not that could be a ground not to 
10 
answer we will deal with it if and when it arises.  It might 
not arise. 
 
So – so – but that is fine.  Let us see how it goes 
and – and where there are challenges or concerns we will 
deal with them. 
ADV MASUKU:  Thank you Deputy Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I will allow Mr Molefe the 
opportunity to read or make some remarks or statements 
before he gives evidence.  As I understand from you Mr 
Masuku that he would like that opportunity.  Mr Molefe I 
20 
have indicated to your counsel that although I have 
allowed other witnesses to – that opportunity from a 
certain time I have been concerned whether we should 
insist that we should receive a written statement in 
advance so that we could see whether it will implicate any 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 12 of 102 
 
third parties or any other people in wrongdoings so that the 
relevant procedural issues can be attended to. 
 
But my understanding from your counsel is that your 
statement should not have anything like that.  So after Mr 
– before Mr Seleka starts leading your evidence I will allow 
you the opportunity to either read the statement or make 
the remarks that you – that you wish to make.  Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Should I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready to start or do you still have 
some housekeeping issues to attend to? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  No I am ready to start Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I could identify the file and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think let us – let us allow Mr 
Molefe to make his remarks or read his statement and then 
after that we – we – you can then take it from there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson.  Let me start by 
expressing my gratitude for allowing me to crave your 
20 
indulgence in making the statement. 
 
Chairperson 
during 
the 
testimony 
of 
Dr 
Ben 
Ngubane you asked a pertinent question which in my 
opinion if answered will put into context and clarify the 
events that took place at Eskom during my tenure there in 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 13 of 102 
 
2015 and 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes just hang on Mr Molefe.  I think you 
might wish to bring the microphone a little closer to you so 
that 
you 
are 
loud 
enough 
and 
you 
can 
keep 
your 
microphone on throughout.  It will – you do not have to 
switch it off when non-speaking or when he is speaking.  
You can just keep it on all the time. Yes you can continue. 
 
I just want everyone to hear what you say properly 
– your voice must be at it loudest. 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not want to talk into it and give the 
10 
whole Covid.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson during that testimony you 
referred to a question that needs to be put to Optimum 
Coal Mine along the lines of and I quote what you said: 
“How did you allow whoever signed on your 
behalf to sign a contract that the price 
would be the same for ten years or more?  
Were they sleeping or what or what was – 
how could you have signed such a contract?  
20 
Nobody signs such a contract.” 
 
Those 
were 
your 
words 
Chairperson. 
 
And 
unfortunately Chairperson these questions were not put to 
OCM.  Because I think although it was during Dr Ngubane’s 
evidence you were asking about OCM’s lack of – or rather 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 14 of 102 
 
– the reason behind what they did. 
 
But the answers to these questions are at the heart 
of how and why we find ourselves where we are today.  
Why they were not asked?  Nor had they barely answered 
these questions Glencore did shed some light as to how 
they had put themselves in that precarious situation out of 
which they were demanding to be rescued by Eskom. 
 
Glencore did not sign the contract that you referred 
to.  Glencore bought the contract with the company that 
had signed the contract.  This is in the evidence of Mr 
10 
Ephron before this commission and it was on the 13 
January – sorry it was – ja it was on the 13 January 2020 
that he have this evidence. 
 
That they had bought a company together with the 
SCA -  CSA – Call Supply Agreement.  Although Mr Ephron 
is a Chartered Accountant he admitted that Glencore did 
not conduct a due diligence on Optimum prior to the 
acquisition of the company and the contract. 
 
Nor had they bothered to acquaint themselves with 
how the Coal Supply Agreement worked.  This was in page 
20 
3 of the statement sorry in paragraph – in page 3 of his 
statement.   
 
Instead 
of 
conducting 
due 
diligence 
and 
understanding how the Coal Supply Agreement worked they 
did something extraordinary Chairperson.  They sold 9.64% 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 15 of 102 
 
of the shares in the new acquired company to Mr Cyril 
Ramaphosa. 
 A 
political 
heavyweight 
and 
made 
him 
chairman of the newly acquired company. 
 
That was a strategic decision to use the former 
Secretary General of the African National Congress and 
former Secretary General of the National Union of Mine 
Workers.  A member of the National Executive Committee 
of the ANC at the time. 
 
They knew that the profitability of the company 
could only come from a successful renegotiation of the 
10 
coal price and ignoring by Eskom of the penalties that were 
accumulating at the time. 
 
Mr Ramaphosa was their bet.  The profitability of 
Optimum was therefore dependent on the pedalling of 
political influence.  And the extent to which Glencore would 
be 
able 
to 
exert 
pressure 
on 
Eskom 
directors 
and 
management and not on the fundamentals of the company 
that they had acquired. 
 
This in my opinion was the source of Glencore’s 
problems.  They had made their bed and needed to lie on 
20 
it.  It was unfair and arrogant of them to demand as they 
were doing that Eskom should effectively pay for the 
irresponsible manner in which they had tied themselves 
into the proverbial knot. 
 
You observed Chairperson that on my arrival at 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 16 of 102 
 
Eskom there was and I quote you: 
“A complete change of attitude on the part 
of 
Eskom 
on 
the 
deal 
that 
had 
been 
proposed 
and 
had 
been 
supported 
by 
various levels of management.” 
 
You were referring to the deal that had been 
entered into by Eskom management and Glencore to save 
Glencore’s skin from the consequences of purchasing a 
company having not conducted due diligence. 
 
Eskom management and Glencore were in the 
10 
process of sub-vetting Section 38 of the PFMA.  Section 38 
1C I which talks about the duty of a state owned entity or a 
state body to collect what is owed to it. 
 
On the 8 December 2020 during the course of these 
hearings the evidence leader Advocate Seleka was at pains 
to explain how Glencore had fallen into hardship because 
the export price of coal had taken a nosedive. 
 
Dr Ngubane tried to explain to the commission that 
when the international coal price was high and Optimum 
enjoyed super profits they had not shared their spoils with 
20 
Eskom. 
 
What was unfortunately lost in that exchange is the 
fact that Optimum was a cost plus mine.  It had been built 
with Eskom’s capital and had been given a 40 year 
contract.  Eskom had responsibility for the mining costs 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 17 of 102 
 
and in return Optimum received a six margin.  Eskom was 
and I think at some point during the hearings you referred 
to this as an absurd arrangement.  Eskom was unfairly 
excluded in participating in the super profits of the time 
when times were good and yet it was expected to fork out 
more capital.  Forego its legitimate price expectations and 
subsidise rich international corporations when the times 
were bad. 
 
That is the situation that we find ourselves in.  You 
correctly pointed out Chairperson that Eskom had a 
10 
legitimate contract with Optimum.  In terms of that contract 
we at Eskom were supposed to get from them coal at the 
price of R150.00 per ton until 2018.  Those were the terms 
of the contract.   
 
 
Whether they liked it whether they did not like it 
those were the terms of the contract.  In addition they had 
accumulated penalties in terms of that contract to the 
value of R2 billion.   
 
Evidence was led in this commission that that R2 
billion was not a figment of the – of my imagination.  That 
20 
R2 billion was calculated at – accumulated from 2012.  I 
think it was Mr Bester who said that he actually had 
calculated the R2 billion and during his hearing on that 
matter there was debate about whether or not it should 
have been a million more or a million less but it was about 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 18 of 102 
 
R2 billion. 
 
Optimum demanded that the price of coal be 
increased to R530.00 per ton and that the penalties of R2 
billion should be written off.  Somebody mentioned 530 the 
other day and Advocate Seleka jumped and said it was not 
530 it was 400 and something. But Advocate Seleka when 
they came to me for the first time the figure was 530.  It 
may or may not have been written but that is what I clearly 
recall and they later on reduced it to what you refer to.  
But the original demand at least to me it was R530.00 per 
10 
ton from R150.00. 
 
It was the opening negotiating position.  R530.00 
from R150.00.  An increase from R150.00 to R530.00 per 
ton would have meant a transfer of R6 billion from Eskom 
to Glencore over a period of three years.  2015 to 2018. 
 
Add to this the R2 billion write off of the penalties 
that they were asking for.  The amount that Glencore 
wanted Eskom to pay for their original mistake of not doing 
due diligence was R8 billion. 
 
R8 billion Chairperson.  The observation that there 
20 
was a complete change of attitude on the part of Eskom on 
the deal that had been proposed and had been supported 
by various levels of management when I arrived at Eskom 
is absolutely correct. 
 
I am not ashamed of this change of attitude that 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 19 of 102 
 
occurred.  When I arrived I was having Eskom’s interest 
and those of the country at heart.  What was happening 
was wrong on many fronts.  It was literally going to 
financially ruin Eskom. 
 
But there was an added issue to this.  The Glencore 
position would have seen an inequitable situation.  The 
poor and most vulnerable in the country would subsidise 
the dealings of the rich.  There was no way that I could 
with a clean conscience attend public gatherings and 
meetings and shout until I am hoarse that Soweto residents 
10 
needed to pay their debt to Eskom, when I was allowing 
international corporates to disadvantage Eskom on many 
fronts, not over.  I could not face Eskom employees and 
unions and tell them that their bonuses will not be paid or 
that their salary increases will be zero.  The bonuses will not 
be paid as was many the case in 2015.   
 
And that we had no funds to fix the apartheid wage gap 
that still exists between black and white employees of 
Eskom.  There is still an apartheid wage gap at Eskom, while 
rich international corporations were duly - unduly exploiting 
20 
Eskom.   
 
As I have stated the payments to Glencore would have 
sunk Eskom.  You will recall Chairperson that this was at the 
time when load-shedding was becoming the norm.   
 
I could not Chairperson say to South Africans that load-
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 20 of 102 
 
shedding will continue because we do not have enough 
money to conduct planned backlog maintenance on our 
electricity generating fleet.  I am still allowed eight billion to 
be unjustly transferred to Glencore.   
 
When I arrived at Eskom, a de facto board of the 
company had been established outside of the company in the 
form of a War Room in the Presidency.  Management had to 
report to this War Room.   
 
Ms Matsietsi Mokholo was here yesterday and she 
explained Chairperson, to you, how the War Room demanded 
10 
meetings with management and officials of the Department of 
Public Enterprises, every Friday at seven a.m.  Every Friday, 
they had to present reports.   
 
So when I got there - the biggest activity that was 
happening at Eskom was preparing War Room reports from 
Wednesday, you must start preparing the reports, make sure 
that they are ready for Friday seven a.m.  Then it is 
weekend. 
 
Then 
Monday, 
Tuesday 
we 
work. 
 
Then 
Wednesday we start preparing reports again.  It was an 
unattainable situation.   
20 
 
There was a board, de facto board that was outside of 
the company.  And what is even more strange Chairperson is 
that there has been evidence here including by Ms Mokholo 
who was here yesterday that members of the board, a 
legitimate board, a legal board of Eskom had not seen – 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 21 of 102 
 
were not seeing those War Room reports.  So management 
was reporting to the War Room.   
 
But it gets even better Chairperson.  The Deputy 
President of the Republic, Mr Cyril Ramaphosa was the 
Chairperson of the War Room.  He was in fact a de facto 
chairperson of Eskom.   
 
A de facto chairperson of a de facto board that was 
outside the company.  He was the de facto chairperson and 
had started playing this role directly from begin chairperson 
of Optimum.   
10 
 
When the deal was done in 2012 and he was sold shares 
or he bought shares, he was made chairperson.  In 2014, he 
became Deputy President and Chairperson of the War Room.   
 
One would have expected – corporate governance 
requires that there was be a cooling-off period precisely for 
things like this.  Here is a person who was engaged in 
saying we must renegotiate.  That contract was signed in 
2014, the contract that I found at Eskom.  We must 
renegotiate.   
 
Effectively R 8 billion moves and becomes the de facto 
20 
chairperson of the company.  In fact, he sold his shares to 
Tembani.  I am not sure if that was arms link(?) but he sold 
his shares to Tembani.   
 
But at the time when I got to Eskom and when he was 
Deputy President and he was chairing the War Room, the 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 22 of 102 
 
deal had not gone through.  It was awaiting competition 
commission approval.  I think that was granted in August.  
So I suspect there may have been conflicts but then again, I 
am not an expert.   
 
The membership of the War Room included people like 
Professor Eberhardt from UCT, who has never in my 
presence, uttered an intelligent academic or sane word about 
electricity or corporate strategy.   
 
I quickly came to realise that the War Room was not 
about load-shedding and turning Eskom around.  Something 
10 
else was happening.  Eskom senior managers were being 
destructed from fighting load-shedding by being made to 
attend endless meetings at which they were supposed to 
give unending and meaningless reports.   
 
I was uncomfortable with the War Room and stop 
attending its meetings.  If the War Room had been doing its 
work diligently, it would have solved the load-shedding crisis 
before I arrived at Eskom.   
 
I was relieved when President Zuma closed it down in 
favour of giving management a fair chance at fighting load-
20 
shedding and turning the economy around and turning the 
company around.   
 
Under my leadership and the leadership of – and the 
leadership and technical expertise of people like Mr Koko 
and other engineers, the engineers at Eskom, the guardians 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 23 of 102 
 
as they called them, the employees of Eskom who, when I 
was there, became very reverberated and determined to end 
load-shedding with the figured load-shedding in August 2015.   
 
On the 8t h of August 2015 we stopped load-shedding.  
And we never had load-shedding again for three years after I 
had left Eskom.  Load-shedding came back to Eskom after 
Mr Cyril Ramaphosa following the R 1 billion Lazarec(?) 
[00:07:29] 
Conference 
was appointed 
president 
of the 
country.  That is when load-shedding came back.   
 
And after he was appointed president of the country and 
10 
he in turn appointed the smooth talking and the dictatorial 
Pravin Gordhan as Minister of Public Enterprises.  The less I 
say about Pravin Gordhan the better.   
 
As you see Chairperson, despite his smooth talking, 
Public Enterprises are failing and it appears that they are on 
a course to be sold to private interest.   
 
My suspicion is that like the javelin.  They will be thrown 
over the fence and be caught at a later stage.  It just a 
suspicion.  To put it mildly Chairperson.  The situation made 
me sick.  I found the behaviour of Glencore and that of 
20 
Mr Cyril Ramaphosa to be revolting.   
 
Mr Ramaphosa must have known about what Glencore 
sought to achieve.  He was the Chairperson of the company 
that 
was 
bought 
without 
a 
due 
diligence. 
 
He 
was 
chairperson when the penalties were imposed.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 24 of 102 
 
 
He was still chairperson of Optimum when the unlawful 
agreement that sought to increase the price of coal to from 
150 and set aside the penalties, was negotiated with certain 
members of Eskom’ staff in 2014.   
 
He knew that he was being used based on political 
standing hoped to influence matters to Glencore’s favour.  
He had an interest in the matter, a 9.64%.  He is not naïve 
and he has been dealing with these corporates which gave 
him his riches.   
 
Mr Matjila Koko was interrogated at length about this 
10 
agreement that was entered into before I arrived.  He told 
me that the board had not sanctioned that agreement.   
 
They also told me that the official who had signed it had 
no authority to do so but this is hearsay evidence which I 
shall not burden you with.  Although it is hearsay evidence 
Chairperson, at least I know it was Mr Koko.  I am not telling 
you it was somebody’s brother that I do not know.   
 
I hope that Mr Koko will shed more light on this aspect 
when 
the 
Commission 
ends 
its 
fascination 
with 
the 
suspension of the executives in the hearing of his evidence.   
20 
 
Dr Ben Ngubane and members of his board understood 
the situation perfectly well.  For them, I received the 
blessing to do what was right and for that I am thankful.   
 
It is a pity that this Commission on State Capture missed 
an opportunity to investigate the nature of the cost plus 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 25 of 102 
 
mines and 40-year contracts and what is currently collapsing 
Eskom.  It is truly an injustice to the entire economy.   
 
If this were to be investigated properly, we will all see 
the real problems from which we are being diverted.  I 
believe with the blessing of Mr Cyril Ramaphosa and Pravin 
Gordhan.   
 
I find it to be strange that the focus is on Tegeta given 
the fact that Tegeta supplied less than 4% of Eskom coal, 
while in 2015, four other white rich companies supplied more 
than 80% of Eskom coal to the value in excess of 
10 
R 40 billion per annum with 40-year contracts.  It goes into 
the trillions Chairperson over the 40-year period and yet we 
are here talking about this meeting and that meeting, 
concerning a company that was quite literally not supplying 
much.   
 
Why some of us did not have the privilege of explaining 
our side of the story in an interview with the former Public 
Protector with respect to Optimum Coal Mine?   
 
It is clear that Glencore had unvetted access to her and 
were able to impress on her what their beef with Eskom was.  
20 
Mr Ephron testified in this Commission on page 7 of the 
transcript during his hearing on the 27t h of February 2019.   
 
He testified that he – they did have a meeting with the 
Office of the Public Protector, something that I was not 
afforded as a person against whom they were complaining.  
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 26 of 102 
 
She did not bother to interview me for my side of the story 
as is required by the Public Protector Act.   
 
Section 7(9) talks about whether - what a Public 
Protector must do when a person is implicated.  She must 
inform the person and give that person an opportunity to be 
heard and to interview the witnesses that came with the 
evidence.  She did none of that.   
 
Instead, she proceeded in unprecedented haste to write 
and label as final a report which has been used by the media 
to link certain people including myself and which gave rise to 
10 
this Commission.  I think this Commission is the child of 
report that was written in very suspicious circumstances.  
That is when Mr Madonsela was leading and was in a hurry 
as if there was not going to be a Public Protector anymore in 
South Africa.   
 
Glencore is a multi-billion rand company.  Their BEE 
partner, Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, subsequently rose to become 
the Deputy President and then President of the country.  It is 
rumoured that – and this happened without any cooling-off 
period – it is rumoured that he has campaigned to become 
20 
president of the ANC was financed to the tune of R 1 billion.  
This was unprecedented in the African National Congress.   
 
I dare say that it was not in line with the culture, values 
and ethos of the ANC that I have come to know and which I 
continue to be a member of.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 27 of 102 
 
 
Mere mortals like myself, simple do not stand a chance 
to repeat ourselves against these powerful forces who are 
trying to extort R 8 billion from a state-owned entity, Eskom.   
 
Constitutional bodies wrote powerful reports about us 
and no one dared to question the procedural fairness that 
disrespect for natural justice and the constitution because 
right we had, I believe, it is in the Constitution.   
 
Or even the unlawfulness in the manner in which the 
Public 
Protector’s 
Office 
under 
Thuli 
Madonsela 
has 
conducted itself by disregarding Section 7(9) of the act.  
10 
Nevertheless, I continued to have faith in our Constitution, a 
principle of transformative constitutionalism and the rule of 
law.   
 
I am aware Chairperson that even as I make this 
statement, law enforcement agencies may be ready to 
pounce and judge me with criminal acts.  I appear before you 
and state that my conscience is clear.   
 
This I know because a spokesperson of the SIU, 
Mr Geniel(?) said during a television interview about the 
pending case relating to Eskom against myself and others 
20 
but they had not concluded their investigations, that they 
have not interviewed me and that the single court process 
against myself and others is part of their investigations on 
myself.   
 
Their views of law enforcement and constitutional bodies 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 28 of 102 
 
is not a myth.  But no amount of manipulation of state 
institutions and agencies and intimidation will deter me.   
 
It is unfortunate that the courts appeared to have also 
fallen to the narrative of the so-called State Capture, which 
by the way Chairperson, you must still establish whether or 
not it existed.  It was the purpose of this Commission.  But 
people talk as if you had already made your findings.   
 
Sometimes even your own tongue slips and talks about it 
as if there is a finding.  When this nightmare is over, our 
country will return to normalcy.  I hope that after this 
10 
nightmare, some amongst us would desist from political 
linking and purges and rather focus on the sacred task of 
rebuilding our country.   
 
I will assist the Commission as best as I can.  Just for 
the record Chairperson.  I submitted this affidavit that is in 
front of you in May.   
 
I have written numerous letters to the Commission, 
requesting to come and I was told I was not scheduled and I 
must wait and so on until December.  And in December, to 
my surprise, what I get is a summons.  A summons 
20 
Chairperson who is has been begging to come.   
 
I felt the Commission has a right you to summons but I 
felt like it was unnecessarily hostile because all it took – 
even if I have been sent an SMS message Chairperson, I 
would have been here.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 29 of 102 
 
 
After the summons was issued, the first thing that we did 
is.  We received the summons, we are happy to come.  
Please indicate what it is about?  Which matter is it?  Is it 
Transnet, Eskom?  Is it Eskom?  Which Eskom matters?  No 
reply.  No reply right through December.  No response.  Until 
three days before the day which I was supposed to come.  
Tuesday, Tuesday night at ten o’clock at night, we received 
the documents.  One thousand four hundred pages of 
documents.   
 
I spent the last two days going through the documents.  I 
10 
did not sleep last night because I did not want to come here 
and say to you Chairperson, can we have a postponement.  I 
wanted to engage.  After all, I had said that I had been ready 
for a very long time but it is unfortunate in the manner in 
which this was done.   
 
It is also unfortunate that, if they portray me for lack of 
not going through some of the parts of the documents as a 
person who is not prepared or who is reluctant to appear 
before the Commission.   
 
Despite the fact that I was advised – legal advice was:  
20 
You must treat this carefully.  This is very serious.  You 
cannot go in without having gone through the documents 
properly.  I insisted that I will appear.   
 
That is why Chairperson I have been seeking to come 
and present my side of the story.  A natural justice right that 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 30 of 102 
 
was denied me – that was denied to me by the former Public 
Protector.   
 
My 
heart is 
at ease.  I am ready to face the 
consequences of following the big dates of my conscience.  
Thank you, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Molefe.  I think there are 
certain parts of your statement which made me wish we had 
received it in advance to give it to certain people or at least 
warned them about it.   
 
But I think I can understand that there may be different 
10 
views about whether there would be a need to do that.  But 
maybe that – if I had – if we received it in advance, we 
would have preferred to err on the side of caution and given 
it.   
 
So I just make this point to indicate that, to the extent 
that either you or your counsel might have taken the view 
that there is nothing that implicates anybody.  I am not 
criticising that.  I am not criticising that but ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...I may have preferred to err on the side 
20 
of caution.  So I just wanted to make that point.  You want to 
say something before I proceed? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson.  Mr Ramaphosa is 
mentioned in my affidavit of May 2020.  Not only mention 
him, I also talk about this issue of the shares and so on.  I 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 31 of 102 
 
do not know if, after reading that affidavit on how seriously 
that affidavit was taken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   If there were any further investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   What surprised me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   is that there was no follow-up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   There is nothing.  Even in the papers that I 
10 
received on Tuesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Nothing says we would like to talk about this 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   This issue that I consider to be the most 
critical. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I am not raising it for the first time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   In my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine.  That was 
the first point I wanted to make.  The second point I want to 
make is that.  I like the idea that you have taken the attitude 
that you want to assist the Commission as much as you can. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 32 of 102 
 
 
And I think from the statement you have made, you have 
even said:  Yes, I agree that when I came to Eskom, there 
was a change of attitude but there were reasons for that.  
And I will deal with the reasons why that was so.   
 
And you have said, you sought to act in the interest of 
Eskom.  That is why there was that change of attitude.  So 
your statement gives me the impression that you are ready 
to engage with issues with a view to placing the facts as you 
know them before the Commission on the very issues, but 
also, to give the Commission your perspective.   
10 
 
Because sometimes the facts are the same but the 
perspectives are different from different people.  So I have 
said all along that, as the Commission we want to get all the 
perspectives from different people.  We want to get facts 
from everybody.   
 
And of course, what has happened in some instances is 
that certain people have come forward to the Commission 
and given affidavits, given information about the facts as 
they see them and their perspective of issues.   
 
And then others who might have a different perspective 
20 
of the same issues, some of them have not come forward to 
say:  These are our perspectives on the same issues or 
these are the facts as we know them.   
 
The result of that is that until all sides give the 
Commission their perspectives and the facts as they see 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 33 of 102 
 
them.   
 
Whenever there is only evidence and perspective from 
one side and the other side does not come forward, it puts 
the Commission in a place where it only knows one side.  
And so I am quite clear and I have said it before that we 
want all perspectives.  We want facts from all sides.  So that 
when we make findings, we make findings based on all 
sides, facts and all sides’ perspectives.   
 
So I think your statement, at least, gives me the 
impression that you are ready to give the Commission the 
10 
facts as you know them and your own perspective on various 
issues which is quite important.   
 
I know that you said that sometimes even from me, 
sometimes when it comes to State Capture, you say there is 
a slip of the tongue.  I think... Well, all I can say is.  From 
the beginning of the Commission up to now, I have tried to 
make it very clear whenever I talk about State Capture that I 
am talking about the alleged State Capture.   
 
I think that anyone who examines what I have said about 
State Capture in the hearings and in the media briefings, will 
20 
find, at least, that most of the time, I am talking about 
alleged State Capture or State Capture, if it is proved that it 
existed.   
 
But I cannot say that when you examined all statements 
I have made from 2018, whether inside the hearing or 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 34 of 102 
 
outside, and you might not find something that you say:  Oh, 
okay.  He does not say now alleged.  [laughs]  You know.   
 
But certainly, there is – certainly from my side, that still 
must be proved and I will only make findings when all 
evidence has been completed.   
 
So I thought I would just mention that.  But thank you 
very much.  I think that we should then – I should allow Mr 
Seleka to start.  Okay Mr Seleka.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Molefe and 
I had a collegial exchange ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Before you proceed.  It would 
be good if I could have a copy of your statement Mr Molefe. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  I was going to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And my learned friend has indicated, he 
wants to give us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mister ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU SC:   Sorry, Chairperson.  That copy that you 
have, have got some minor edits on it but there are...  ja, 
that is just typing errors and so on because we – I finished it 
20 
literally ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You have one that has – in which those 
minor errors had been corrected? 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Oh, no I do not have it with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have?  Ja. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 35 of 102 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I literally did not... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...to come here.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But it can be made available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what can be done is.  This one can be 
replaced. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With one that has been corrected. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   That has been properly edited. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Because over the last three days, it 
really had been a nightmare. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  And so it can be replaced with 
a version that reflects that the errors have been corrected. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I wanted to say.  Mr Seleka as well as 
Mr Masuku, separately and together, you can apply your 
minds as to whether this statement was the corrected one. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   H’m. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can or should be admitted as an exhibit or 
not.  You do not have to, if you are not ready to say that 
now, you can tell me later in the day. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I think my inclination will be that it 
has to. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 36 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because it makes reference to certain 
persons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The two in particular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And I think in all fairness to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Once it is accepted, it has to be served 
on them. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So that that part of what he said about 
them does not remain a mere statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   In the opening address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  I think Mr Masuku wishes to say 
something on this point. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Deputy Chief Justice, they are 
sabotaging me to come and stand behind the podium 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU SC:   [Indistinct]  
[Parties intervening each other – unclear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what are they preventing from going 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 37 of 102 
 
to the podium? 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I do not understand ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because you wanted to go to the podium. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, I was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you must go to the podium. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, why have they prevented you?  
[laughs]  Just sanitise the podium and then you can use it.  
But I am sure Mr Masuku, it is not any attempt to sabotaging 
you.  [laughs]   
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Deputy Chief Justice, I am in agreement 
with my learned friend’s view.  The allegations made in the 
statement are not light allegations.  That State Capture is 
what you find in the statement of Mr Molefe.  I rather would 
add, is that, perhaps what should be send to the – to those 
implicated in the statement is not just the written statement 
that has been handed up to you but that the transcript of 
what he ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Said. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   said ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...be part of his statement.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of what was said, ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Because at some point, I think he was 
elaborating on certain things, he would move away from the 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 38 of 102 
 
statement and elaborate on certain things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So if that could be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   That will be... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   The statement is not lightly made.  It is 
a very serious statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So I do accept that it is one that should 
10 
be – certainly ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Made an exhibit. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Ja, yes.  But just to take advantage of 
the fact that I am here.  I made an error when I said that I 
was instructed by the Molefe attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   It is Molaba Attorneys.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But our instructing attorney is 
Mr Molefe. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU SC:   So it was just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   There are a lot of Molefe’s.  So.  [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, no, right here... [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  You got him understand you have 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 39 of 102 
 
been confused.  [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Taken – we take it that in 
reading the statement, which is not an affidavit, can we take 
it that Mr Molefe was doing so on the understanding that he 
is under oath, therefore.  Although it is a statement but – 
because I see he had already taken oath.   
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I need to clarify it because he may 
have prepared it ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I think he will answer that for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So what we have canvassed that is with 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And he has no difficulties turning it into 
an affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Into an affidavit, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   If it should be required by the 
Commission to do so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   As he says, some of the things he made 
– 
some 
of 
the 
allegations 
he 
made, 
already 
in 
his 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In his affidavit. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 40 of 102 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...in his affidavit.  So there will not be 
any deviation from his central mission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Which is to tell the Commission about 
what real State Capture looks like.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay alright. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Masuku.  Oh, I did not 
realise...  I hope my watch is right.  I did not realise that we 
have gone past quarter past eleven.  It says half-past 
10 
eleven.  Is that the right time? 
ADV MASUKU SC:   It is the right time Chair.  We have gone 
beyond the tea-time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  So I think that we should take 
the tea-break now then, so that when we come back, then 
you can start leading Mr Molefe’s evidence. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Okay that is in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will take the tea adjournment now.  It 
is half-past.  We will resume at quarter to twelve. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you may proceed, Mr Seleka. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 41 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I must just effectively make this 
announcement that going forward any witness who wishes 
to make remarks which are not in an affidavit or statement 
that has been given to the Commission already should 
forward his or her statement to the Commission at least 
seven days before the date of hearing and indicate that 
they would request to be allowed to read that statement at 
the Commission.  That will give the Commission and 
opportunity to look at it and see whether anybody should 
be alerted to it, advance on it.  So I just want to make that 
10 
so that in the future …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …everybody knows what is going to 
happen. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, proceed. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Eskom 
bundle 17, Chairperson, EXHIBIT U38.  That is the bundle 
we will be using.  EXHIBIT U38 contains Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit and it starts on page 5.  Mr Molefe, again the 
20 
black pagination, the top left hand corner.  You are there, 
Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I am, sir. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  The affidavit, Chairperson, 
runs up to page 38.  Mr Molefe, please go to page 38.  38, 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 42 of 102 
 
go to page 38.  Yes.  So that is the last page of the 
affidavit.  You see the signature there above the name 
Brian Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You confirm that to be your signature? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes it is indeed, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   You confirm this entire affidavit to be 
your affidavit? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes and I also confirm that it was signed on 
the 13 May 2020. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Mr Molefe.  Chairperson, 
may I beg leave to have it admitted as EXHIBIT U38.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Brian Molefe starting 
at page 5 of Eskom bundle 17 is admitted together with its 
annexures as EXHIBIT U38.1. 
AFFIDAVIT OF MR BRIAN MOLEFE TOGETHER WITH 
ANNEXURES HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT U38.1 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Chairperson, 
Mr Molefe and I had a friendly discussion this morning and 
I told him that Dr Ngubane remembers him for his charisma 
20 
and dance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And dancing skills. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja and he said he will give us a treat 
but now he took a long time in his address so I will simply 
go straight to the evidence. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 43 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   There will be no time for dancing. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Absolutely, Chair.  Ja, thank you, Mr 
Molefe.  Ample evidence has been led before us about your 
secondment to Transnet – I mean, to Eskom from Transnet.  
Could you tell the Chairperson about – a little bit about 
when you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Molefe – Mr Seleka... 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, Mr Masuku.  Yes, I think that 
quite a number of the initial pages of Mr Brian Molefe’s 
10 
affidavit talks about matters that we do not have to deal 
with. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About whether his contract was one for 
an indefinite period or a fixed term and pension and so on 
because those matters have been dealt with in litigation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you do not have to deal with those, I 
think it is sufficient to deal with his secondment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when he started at Eskom on an 
acting basis and when he became – when he was 
appointed, then to go to the real issues. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 44 of 102 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Mr Molefe, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I think a lot of those matters 
have been dealt with in litigation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But which there has a judgment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes.  No, I have indicated that 
much, Chair, the pension payout will not be traversed in 
his evidence.  But, Mr Molefe, you could just before you go 
into 
the 
secondment, 
just 
tell 
the 
Chairperson 
your 
previous employment prior to coming to Eskom.  If you do 
10 
not follow my question you will ask, is it not? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, no, it just occurred to me how far back 
you wanted to go but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sure he just wants the employer 
before the Eskom employer only. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So I was – I worked in the office of the 
Premier in Limpopo, under Premier Mangoro(?) Matlhodi(?) 
as a Chief Director for Strategic Planning.  I have worked 
20 
in the National Treasury as a director in the budget office 
dealing with provincial budgets and I was promoted again 
to Chief Director dealing with provincial budgets and then I 
became – sorry, asset management, Chief Director Asset 
Management 
which 
was 
actually 
about 
state 
owned 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 45 of 102 
 
entities, the assets were the state owned entities.   
In fact while I was there it was during the time when 
the PFMA was being written and I was in part of the 
committee that wrote the parts of the PFMA that relate to 
state owned entities and I promoted to Deputy Director 
General, 
asset 
and 
liability 
management, 
where 
we 
managed the debt, South Africa’s debt both in domestic 
and international capital markets, the issuing of bonds in 
the domestic capital market and the issuing of bonds in the 
international capital markets to finance the deficit.   
10 
We also did cash management and the Chief 
Director who was now doing asset management also 
reported to me, so it was state owned entities and debt 
management. 
And then I was sent to the Public Investments 
Commissioners 
at 
the 
time 
as 
a 
secretary 
for 
the 
Commission. 
 
We 
started 
a 
process 
to 
change 
the 
legislation 
to 
convert 
the 
Public 
Investments 
Commissioners into a corporation because really the PIC 
was an asset management company and we wanted to 
20 
professionalise it and when I was …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   When was that, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   I went to the PIC I think in 2000 or 2001.  I 
was there until about 2008.  I was there for seven years.  
The Public Investment Corporation Act was passed in 2004 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 46 of 102 
 
and while I was there, we were managing assets – when I 
joined, assets under management were about R310 billion 
and by the time I left in 2008, assets under management 
were about R950 billion, just short of one trillion.   
 
Subsequently, I think about a year after I left, the 
assets went over one trillion and they stayed about one 
trillion.  And …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   After 2008?  After 2008 where did you 
go? 
MR MOLEFE:   After 2008 for about a year I decided 
10 
maybe I was going to do my own thing and do some private 
transactions by myself. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh, let me ask you this, when did you 
join Transnet? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think it was 2010. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   2010? 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it was 2011. 
MR MOLEFE:   Was it 2011?  Yes, thereabouts, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You joined Transnet in 2011, early, I 
20 
think it may have been February or March or thereabout. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, I may make mistakes but I 
have submitted my CV, which has accurate details. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, but from …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   I must apologise. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 47 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I might have left the PIC in 2009 then and 
went to Transnet in 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I remember there was about 18 months 
where I was just doing gardening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I have read somewhere that you left 
PIC in 2010.  Is that incorrect? 
MR MOLEFE:   It is possible because at the time when I 
was leaving the PIC I kept saying to the board that I would 
10 
like to leave and they kept saying stay for another six 
months, stay for another three months, stay – my contract 
had ended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the importance of whether you left 
PIC 2010 relates to when exactly did you leave because I 
may have misunderstood you but I though you said you left 
PIC in 2008. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chair, we can go through my CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Which is an annexure and I think it is more 
20 
accurate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you have not worked for too many 
employers.  I would have thought that you would know 
these things easily because you were just in the Premier ’s 
office in Limpopo, you were in National Treasury, you were 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 48 of 102 
 
in PIC and then after that you were in Transnet. 
MR MOLEFE:   But we only started there, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hey? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is where we started. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is on page 46. 
MR MOLEFE:   Sorry? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Page 46. 
MR MOLEFE:   46? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Using the black numbers on the top left 
10 
of each – of a page. 
MR MOLEFE:   46. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the CV starts at page 46. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  2011, 2015 at Transnet and June 
2003 to July 2010 at Public Investments Corporation.  I am 
sorry, Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    On which page? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think I was right, Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 48 you CV says February 2011 to 
20 
April 2015 you were Group Chief Executive of Transnet. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I was right about when you started at 
Transnet. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 49 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what we do – what we need to see is 
when you left PIC. 
MR MOLEFE:   Your memory is impeccable, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOLEFE:   I say your memory is impeccable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not really.  I remember some things and 
I do not remember other things. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is there, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I do not see – I do not know if you 
deal with PIC here.  You should be dealing with it but I 
10 
cannot immediately see. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is there.  It is there, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It has June 2003 to July 2010, Chief 
Executive Officer of Public Investment Corporation.  On the 
same page. 
MR MOLEFE:   On page 48? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Where it says work experience.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can see that, so I think 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   So it starts with Eskom, it goes to Transnet 
then it goes to PIC. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 50 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think I was right also that you left 
PIC in 2010. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Just by way 
of a background, Mr Molefe, the Gupta brothers, Mr Salim 
Essa, have become the highlight of the day and just by way 
of a background could you explain to the Chairperson, 
10 
starting first with the Gupta brothers, whether you had – 
you knew them, you had any relationship with them, of 
what kind? 
MR MOLEFE:   I feel like, Chairperson, let me start with 
Salim Essa because I think it is easier.  I actually do not 
know Salim Essa.  I have never met him.  I do not know 
what he looks like.  I hear about him.   
 
The Gupta brothers I know and I know all three of 
them but the one that I know – that I had a lot of 
interactions with was in fact Mr Ajay Gupta and not his two 
20 
brothers.  And ja, I know Mr Ajay Gupta, I have been to his 
house.  I have been to their house and I have been there 
on numerous occasions to attend family functions, to have 
private meetings, a lot of times, so I know them.  I know 
them quite well, especially Mr Ajay Gupta. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 51 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   So I will not try to say to you that I do not 
know them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Like it is fashionable to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Can you also tell the Chairperson 
according to your recollection when did you come to know 
them? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, it is a very long story and – 
10 
but I believe you have the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I did not hear that first 
sentence. 
MR MOLEFE:   I say it is a very long story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Well, will it take five, ten 
minutes? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Much more than that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   The Commission will go over budget. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us first give you fifteen minutes 
and see whether that will do.   
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell us – yes. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 52 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   While I was at the PIC I was called by Dr 
Motsuenyane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dr? 
MR MOLEFE:   Motsuenyane, Sam Motsuenyane.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sam Motsuenyane 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And he asked me to come to his house on a 
Saturday afternoon and we sat under a tree and they made 
us tea and he told me a very long story, long painful story.  
10 
He said to me that in 1964 an idea occurred to him that 
part 
of 
the 
problem 
that 
African 
people 
were 
not 
progressing was access to credit and yet they were 
classified as high risks by the bank and yet the money that 
was in the banks was theirs because they made deposits. 
 
So he says it occurred to him that maybe what he 
should do is establish a bank that would be an African 
Bank.  In fact that is what it was called.  And he says he 
went around all the townships and villages in South Africa 
trying to establish a bank.  Trying to establish a bank and 
20 
there were no hotels there.  In fact, the hotels that were 
there did not take black people in the ‘60’s and the ‘70’s 
and he slept in people’s houses and told them about this 
idea of establishing a bank and they donated money 
towards the establishment of the bank, these business 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 53 of 102 
 
people who owned cafes and butcheries and African people 
that were not allowed to be involved in manufacturing by 
legislation at the time. 
 
So it took him 10 years to raise R1 million with 
which to establish a bank and then when he had raised that 
R1 million, he says he spoke to the ANC about it and they 
gave their blessings but also directed him to go to London 
and speak to Barclays and he did.  And Barclays said we 
will help you and they gave him the R9 million and he came 
to South Africa and he had R10 million with which to 
10 
establish a bank. 
 
Now he came to South Africa and had to apply for 
banking licence from the Reserve Bank and the Reserve 
Bank  did not refuse him, they gave him a banking licence 
with Barclays but put onerous conditions including the 
board membership of the bank and all sorts of things.  It 
was incidentally headquartered in Ga-Rankuwa, which is 
where I am from and I remember it very well, it was in Zone 
16, next to the cinema there, Makoko(?) 
 
So he says because of the conditions of the 
20 
Reserve Bank  the bank struggled.  For example, they were 
not allowed to open current accounts and yet their clients 
were business people from the township.  They had to 
come and withdraw cash to go to Makro – to Metro and to 
Makro every Friday to buy stock.  So they could not just go 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 54 of 102 
 
and sign cheques there and it was very painful experience 
under the supervision of a very hostile Reserve Bank at the 
time. 
 
But a long story short, Chairperson, his point was 
Molefe, you are now CEO of the PIC, it controls so many 
billion rands, the Governor of the Reserve Bank is a black 
man who comes from the ANC and the ANC is in power, the 
ANC that had bought into this idea in the first place in the 
‘70’s and [indistinct – speaking African language] which 
means [indistinct – speaking African language], what is so 
10 
difficult for you guys?   
And, Chairperson, that was also a very, very – I 
took those words to heart and I went back to the PIC and I 
think it was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was saying in effect look what I did 
under very difficult conditions. 
MR MOLEFE:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With hostility coming from the Reserve 
Bank  and it was apartheid government, now you have an 
ANC government,  you have the ANC here, you have a 
20 
governor of the Reserve Bank who has the background of 
the ANC, he is black …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   The president of the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The conditions are – should be much 
more easier for you to achieve these things. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 55 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Exactly.  To achieve this thing, to capture 
the saving of African people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   With the purpose of reinvesting them.  
Reinvesting them, to advance and improve the conditions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was saying what is your problem? 
MR MOLEFE:   He says – ja.  Actually, he did not say what 
it is - [indistinct – speaking African language].  I think what 
is your problem is mild.   [indistinct] is [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, why are you failing? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Why are you failing?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes.  So, Chairperson, I mean, it gave 
me sleepless nights and I came back and thought about 
this thing.  At about the same time there was a rumour that 
Nedbank is for sale and I decided that maybe what we 
should do is take Nedbank and transform it into this bank 
that Mr Motsuenyane was talking about. 
 
So I mulled over the idea.  I contacted Nedbank, it 
is owned by Old Mutual.  They confirmed that Nedbank was 
20 
indeed for sale.  They had advised we were supposed to 
oversee the sale, expressed my interest and they agreed 
and they said but Molefe, can you raise the capital?  I said 
I will try.  And I left the PIC to go on this mission and I 
went to London to speak to people there about doing this 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 56 of 102 
 
and I even thought of maybe we could buy some other 
banks like Standard – not Standard Bank, the one that is 
outside South Africa. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja, while Mr Molefe is thinking, Chair… 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I remember it now, but it is Standard 
something.  But, anyway …[intervenes] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Mr Molefe, sorry.  I was saying to the 
Chairperson while you are thinking I must remind you that 
your pilot experience and estimation of time should not fail 
me. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   But the Chairperson just gave me... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  But, Chairperson, in South Africa there 
was a family that had come from India, had established 
themselves as business people and had opened a computer 
company and – well, I heard that they were doing quite 
well and I went to them and I asked, if one wants to 
establish a bank, what – where can one get the capital?  
How can one raise the capital to establish such a bank?  
And they said that is very interesting.  You know, in India 
20 
we have banks that are Indian-owned, that our banks like 
Bank of Baroda and several others, let us speak to some 
people in England – I mean, in India, to see if they will be 
able to assist and they did.   
 
I am not sure if I should mention who they spoke to 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 57 of 102 
 
but they spoke to one of the richest people in India.  I met 
him.  I am just reluctant to release his name now.  And he 
agreed and he said we will do the deal. 
 
After five minutes of discussion, he said I will help 
buy a bank.  I was happy, I was elated.  And we went to the 
Reserve Bank with this person and the Guptas and Mr Ajay 
Gupta.  And we got to the Reserve Bank and banking 
supervision said no, we cannot allow this to happen, 
Nedbank cannot be sold, we have already sold Standard 
Bank to the Chinese.  We have already sold ABSA to the 
10 
English. 
 
I remember when the Barclays Bank came to the 
PIC, when I was CEO, to say that they would like to buy 
ABSA and I said to them I did not think that the Anglo Boer 
War would end like this. 
 
Any anyway, but then the Reserve Bank  was 
reluctant to proceed and with the Reserve Bank reluctant 
to proceed – the Governor was Mr Mboweni.  I do not know 
if I am implicating him, but he was Mr Mboweni.  And I 
even saw him – we had a code for this.  If you ask him 
20 
what is the Groblersdal minute, he will tell you what it is.  
It was about a black bank, it was about buying Nedbank. 
 
So it was turned down by the Reserve Bank, so we 
did not proceed and so I was left – then I thought I would 
establish a property company.  I spoke to Investec and 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 58 of 102 
 
they were prepared to help in however way they could help.  
And then one day …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not speak too far away from your 
mic. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And then one day I got a call.  Not from the 
Guptas, from a head-hunter called Brian – now I am talking 
– what am I – I am talking about Transnet now.  Oh, how I 
know the Guptas.  Okay, that is how I know them, 
10 
Chairperson.  That is  - why now I am going to Transnet.  
Now I am going to how I went to Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But that is how I got to know them.  We 
were doing this deal. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And right through the years, Chairperson, 
we never stopped talking about this bank.  And even up to 
today, I am still talking about it.  And even up to today, I 
am still on that mission, Chairperson, of Dr Motsuenyane.  
20 
Hopefully before he passes on we can make him proud. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So the interaction 
with them, it is a while back when you were at PIC and it 
seems in that process, as you say, you came to know them 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 59 of 102 
 
very well.  Yes.  But just keep your microphone on. 
MR MOLEFE:   I can also mention that while I was at the 
PIC they also tried to do deals there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They also tried to do deals there. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, at the PIC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please look this side so I can hear. 
MR MOLEFE:   They tried to do deals with PIC, they 
submitted funding applications. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And they were not approved while I was 
10 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   There is not a single deal that they did with 
the PIC when I was there. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to remember when it was 
you started interacting with them while you were at PIC?  
From around which year? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, maybe around 2007/2008. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   As you have seen, I cannot even remember 
my own life. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will not hold you to it, ja, okay, 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 60 of 102 
 
continue. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And talking about deals, sorry I am just 
going out of sequence a bit but we will come to it, talking 
about deals Mr Molefe we know that at least that at Eskom 
Tegeta reach was having links with the Gupta Brothers. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They would get deals at Eskom.  
MR MOLEFE:   They did. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   They did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Seleka, I know I am 
10 
interrupting you, before you get to Tegeta let me ask some 
question to Mr Molefe.  So you started interacting with the 
Gupta Brothers, Gupta family around 2008, that’s your 
estimate, 2007/2008 you are not sure. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said earlier on you have been to 
their house and I think you said many times, is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you said many times is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, several times. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Several times. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, over the years I have lost count and I 
saw nothing wrong or abhorrent in going to their house.  I 
saw them Chairperson as people in South Africa who enjoy 
the right that are in our constitution.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 61 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I had no reason to treat them like lepers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And as people pretend that they be at the 
time when they met them for the first time.  It was a normal 
relationship that I had with people that I had approached 
and who had received us warmly to say let’s talk about 
establishing this institution.  They were foreigners that had 
come to South Africa but were prepared to buy into the 
vision of a bank that would belong to Africa.   They were 
10 
prepared to buy into the vision of taking that bank and 
making it a bank of Africans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Or like the African Bank has been the 
vision of Dr Muzinyane and a lot of our own South African 
business people did not buy into that vision.  I don’t want 
to go into names but I actually have spoken to a lot of 
people who thought that look they ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine.  I assume that as the 
years went by from around 2007 to 2008 when you started 
20 
interacting with them did your relationship with them get 
stronger, did you get closure in terms of the personal 
relationship or professional, whatever it was? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I can’t say close, it depends on how you 
define close. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 62 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes of course. 
MR MOLEFE:   But there were people that I knew 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You interacted with them. 
MR MOLEFE:   That I interacted with, where I tried to do 
this thing and had not succeeded and the vision was kept 
alive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Even when the Reserve Bank turned us 
down we said, I said to them that it does not mean that we 
10 
must give up, and whenever there was information we 
would discuss it, for example Bank of Baroda at some point 
became our target.   It operates very successfully in 
Tanzania and in fact I have paid a lot of visits to Tanzania 
and I just made it my business to see some of the branches 
of Bank of Baroda in Tanzania.   There was another one 
that operates out of Togo, it is Eco Bank in Togo.  That one 
in fact Chairperson Nedbank they asked me if you became, 
if you bought this bank and you became CEO of the Bank 
what would you do?   I said you know what your problem is 
20 
as Nedbank, and now I realise that I was naive because I 
gave them a very important strategic thing that I had 
thought about, and it was even before we did the deal.    
 
I said the biggest bank in Africa with the widest 
reach is actually Eco Bank, it has more branches than any 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 63 of 102 
 
other bank in South Africa.  It started in Nigeria, most of 
its operations are in Nigeria, its headquarters is in Lome, I 
don’t know if you have ever been to Lome Chairperson, it 
is a very interesting place. 
 
You see this market in town where they sell African 
traditional things, what is it called, maimai[?], there’s a big 
one there where they sell all sorts of things, but anyway I 
went there and I saw it, the head office, I didn’t go inside, 
it is just from outside and it is a very impressive operation 
but the problem with it is that their operations have not 
10 
modernised, 
so 
there 
may 
be 
the 
bank 
with 
their 
...[indistinct] of branches, but they don’t have the – at the 
time the issue was there’s AGMS’s and now it will be 
...[indistinct] ja, so they were not moving with the times. 
 
So I thought that if you are Nedbank and you buy 
Ecobank and you modernise it with a reach on the whole 
continent you have done something very big and the deal 
didn’t happen with Nedbank but Nedbank went and bought 
Ecobank but then they didn’t do what needed to be done.  
They also did other things, Nedbank at the time only the 
20 
country they were only in Lesotho and Namibia, and I 
thought what is your reluctance to go outside of South 
Africa.  Well of course we know the reason, the reason is 
because Nedbank actually is a Nederlandsche Bank, it 
came from the Netherlands and it was an Afrikaner Bank 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 64 of 102 
 
for a very long time and perhaps that is why they never left 
South Africa, but they bought Ecobank with the PIC after I 
had left, so we would meet with the Guptas and talk about 
this, and say look at what your friends are doing, Baroda, 
so-so and so on and so forth, ja, so we would discuss 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...issues, most of the time not relating to 
Transnet or Eskom actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Seleka? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Molefe being so 
far as Mr Salim Essa is concerned I did say that I will ask 
you this question about Mr Hank Bester. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Remember Mr Hank Bester says he 
had a meeting in 2014 with Mr Salim Essa. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And during the course of that meeting 
Mr Salim Essa said to show you how powerful we are, or 
something to that effect, we have decided that Mr Brian 
20 
Molefe is going to be the CEO of Eskom. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is 2014 before the announcement 
for your secondment ...[intervenes]   
MR MOLEFE:   In 20? 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 65 of 102 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   2014. 
MR MOLEFE:   2014, yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  So how is it that he knew you 
and you say you didn’t know him based on that instant. 
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Salim Essa? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes Mr Salim Essa and you can tell the 
Chairperson what you said you are going to say. 
MR MOLEFE:   What I said? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What you say will be your response to 
that question. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson I was sitting at Rocco 
Mama’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   At? 
MR MOLEFE:  Rocco Mama’s, you know Rocco Mama’s 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR MOLEFE:   It’s happening there, it is not a shebeen but 
... it is a restaurant it sells very nice hamburgers, and not 
far from my table there were two Indian ladies.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Is that in 2014. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say it is Indian ladies? 
MR MOLEFE:   Hey? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say Indian ladies? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 66 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I think they are sisters, from the way 
that they looked, but I could overhear their conversation 
and one of them kept saying that Mr Zondo is going to be 
the next Chief Justice.  I just think it would be unfair to ask 
you to comment on that, it is exactly the same thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no. 
MR MOLEFE:   And that Mr Seleka will be the Deputy Chief 
Justice [laughing]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no there is nothing wrong in being – 
in say look I can’t comment, I don’t where he got that 
10 
information from, if that is – ja, there is nothing wrong with 
that if you don’t know, but if you – you may well have an 
idea where he might have got that from in which case you 
will say, but when you have no idea you have no idea. 
MR MOLEFE:    So you also don’t know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm? 
MR MOLEFE:  So you also don’t know where they got it 
from? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What?  [laughing] 
MR MOLEFE:   No I don’t know Chairperson where that 
20 
conversation came from, where it was going, I was not 
there, I don’t know Mr Salim Essa, I have never met him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you know people that know him from 
whom he might have got that information as far as you 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 67 of 102 
 
know or you have no reason to think that he got it from 
anybody that you knew? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I actually Chairperson I don’t know 
where he got that from. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t know where, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is just like a lot of the rumours that go 
around and round and round.  In fact it is not something 
that I would normally apply my mind to and worry about 
and fret about and try to find out where it came from, 
because it is just a – it happens every day Chairperson 
10 
that somebody has, somebody was told in the corridor or a 
house, a strange house that he doesn’t know that – about 
me, and he doesn’t even know who that person is.  I don’t 
attach a lot of weight to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fair enough, part of the 
reason why Mr Seleka is asking is that so that if you do 
know something you can share it.  If you don’t know you 
don’t know, but I think we may as well mention this even 
though it might relate to Transnet and you might be able to 
deal with it, you might – if you say you would prefer to deal 
20 
with it when you come back and deal with Transnet that 
would be fine. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I want to say you would know I 
assume that in 2010, December the New Age, which was a 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 68 of 102 
 
newspaper owned by the Guptas ran an article, had an 
article, I don’t know if it was December 6 or December 10 
2010 which was either saying Mr Brian Molefe is going to 
be the next Group CEO of Transnet or the next boss of 
Transnet or whether it was simply saying it is likely that Mr 
Brian Molefe is going to be the next Group CEO of 
Transnet. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you heard about that article? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes I heard about it, I also heard the 
10 
talk about it here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, you don’t know where they got 
that information from? 
MR MOLEFE:   I don’t know but did they say in the article 
where they got the information? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR MOLEFE:   Did they say in the article where they got 
the information from? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have read the article if I recall 
correctly, but I cannot remember whether – probably I don’t 
20 
think they would say, they might say certain reliable 
sources had told them. 
MR MOLEFE:  Did the article say who it was written by? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sure it should show, the – I think 
the legal team can just make arrangements to make a copy 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 69 of 102 
 
of that article available to Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I know about it, the point that I was 
trying to make is did the Commission therefore ask the 
person who wrote the article where did you get that 
information? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the Commission investigations are 
ongoing, but the – what I wanted you to be able to say 
something about if you are able to, is to say we have a 
situation where it seems in 2010 a newspaper that is 
owned by the Gupta family or their entities seems to 
10 
predict that you are going to be the next Group CEO of 
Transnet and it actually that does happen and then in 2014 
according to Mr Hank Bester who gave evidence here he 
meets with Mr Salim Essa on some issue relating to 
Transnet, business or contract, and Mr Salim Essa wants 
Mr Bester ’s company to work with his company and 
according to Mr Bester in an attempt to show that they, I 
assume Mr Salim Essa and whoever else he was talking 
about, are powerful people, he decided to tell him that you 
know we know that the – Mr Brian Molefe is going to be the 
20 
next boss of Eskom and in less than a year that does 
happen, so you might say look I don’t have a comment, I 
don’t know where that came from, that is fine, but it is fair 
to just say there is this, do you have something to say 
about, do you know anything about it. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 70 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   No I don’t know anything about it, I did 
hear about the article at the time, in fact I was out of the 
country and ja, and somebody just came to me and said 
hey have you seen what is on social media, and then I said 
I don’t know what this is all about and it was the end of the 
matter as far as I am concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Molefe let us 
deal with your secondment because it has also come up 
here a couple of times from – your secondment from 
10 
Transnet to Eskom.  Tell the Chairperson how did that 
come about, who approaches you, and what did they say to 
you? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson in regard ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   I am giving you two minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Keep your mic on Mr Molefe, ja just put 
it on. 
MR MOLEFE:  As you can see Chairperson I am very eager 
to help your Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I didn’t hear that. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I said as you can see I am very eager to 
help the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing] yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson as you remember in 2014/2015 
the country suffered debilitating load shedding.   It was so 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 71 of 102 
 
bad Chairperson that one day I went to a bank and I 
wanted to go inside the bank at Irene Mall, which is a small 
mall and I found the bank manager, the Standard Bank 
bank manager, standing outside the bank and he said sorry 
the bank is closed.   I had never imagined that South Africa 
could come to that, that on a weekday, I think it was a 
Wednesday ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I assume it was closed because of load 
shedding. 
MR MOLEFE:   Load shedding, it was in the middle of load 
10 
shedding, the bank was closed, around ten/eleven in the 
morning on a week day, the bank manager was standing 
outside the bank and said the bank is closed and I was at 
Transnet, we were trying to ramp up the transportation of 
coal to Richards Bay because of the backlogs and so on 
and so forth, with electric locomotives. 
 
There was a time when we were running about 36 
trains on the coal line to Richards Bay, scheduling them 36 
trains in about 24 to 30 hours, that’s a lot of trains, electric 
trains and it takes time and planning to schedule trains like 
20 
that and it takes weeks for us to add a train, add a train, 
add a train, until you arrive at the point where you are 
running about one train every 45 minutes to Richards Bay, 
and then there would be load shedding on part of the line 
and the whole systems collapses and it takes three to four 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 72 of 102 
 
weeks, maybe even more, six weeks to get the scheduling 
going on again. 
 
So it really frustrated me on all sorts of levels and 
then one day during a function at I think at the Port of 
...[indistinct] Minister Brown said if we asked you to go to 
Transnet would you go ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Transnet or Eskom? 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Sorry 
Eskom, 
Eskom, 
eish, 
sorry 
Chairperson, my life is a ... if we asked you to go to Eskom 
would you go.  
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Who asked you?  
MR MOLEFE:   Minister Brown. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Minister Brown, Lynne Brown? 
MR MOLEFE:   Lynne Brown yes, and I said yes, and she 
said okay and then a couple of days later, or maybe a week 
or so and she called back and said okay we are activating 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She called back and said? 
MR MOLEFE:   We are activating it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay ja, your move to Eskom. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes and they said that’s fine, and then so I 
was aware that she was working on it, so she would have 
done the communications to the Board and so on.  We 
spoke, actually between me and her on this matter we 
spoke very few words.  She asked and I agreed, there was 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 73 of 102 
 
no long debate and so on and from my side it was like 
South Africa is really collapsing, the bank is closed at ten 
o’clock in the morning or at eleven o’clock in the morning 
and I saw the devastation on the rail line and I thought 
about what I was doing at Transnet was important, the 
implementation of the market demand strategy but I felt 
hey Eskom is more serious, if I can help there I should go 
there, and they activated it, she spoke to the Boards, one 
day I was on my way to Cape Town and I remember it was 
a Friday afternoon, no Thursday afternoon.  I had been 
10 
invited to speak as a guest at a graduation ceremony of I 
think it was the Technikon, the Technikon in Cape Town, 
Western Cape Technikon, I don’t know what they call it now 
and I said – well she said where are you, I said I am at the 
airport, I am going to Cape Town.  She says don’t go, we 
are making the announcement tomorrow.  And I called Mr 
Caso Qiqwa[?] who was the CEO of Transport Port 
Terminals and I asked my PA to email him my speech at the 
graduation and asked him to go to Cape Town and deliver 
that speech, he was in Durban and then I stayed and she 
20 
said tomorrow morning at ten o’clock you must be at 
Eskom, on Friday and then she made the announcement. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
We 
know 
that 
she 
made 
the 
announcement I think on the 17 t h of April 2015. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes that is correct. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 74 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so even if you don’t remember the 
exact date when she – that is now Minister Brown, raised 
this issue with you for the first time, how long before the 
17 t h of April do you think it was how much time lapsed 
between the time when she raised it for the first time with 
you and the end when it was announced? 
MR MOLEFE:   Probably a week or a week and a half, 
something like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A week or a week and a half. 
MR MOLEFE:   A week and a half ja, since she raised it 
10 
with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From what you say it looks like she was 
the first person to mention the possibility of you moving to 
Eskom. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, and she managed the process of 
communicating to the Boards, that the Boards had taken 
their proper decisions and this was done and I think in one 
– either one or both of them it was an ex poste approval 
which ...[indistinct] but the – and then there was a proper 
agreement that was signed and I went to Eskom. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your – would it be fair to say your 
understanding was that she managed the whole process of 
your move from Transnet to Eskom. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 75 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   And Chairperson she was the shareholder 
of 
both 
companies, 
representative 
shareholder, 
100% 
shareholding 
...[indistinct] 
and 
they 
belong 
to 
the 
government, so if government said look you must move 
from here to there to help there at the time she said you 
will come back to Transnet, it’s just an appoint just to – 
there are certain things that I don’t understand at Eskom.  
For example she says they are telling me that they cannot 
pay salaries in two months, Matsietsi Mohkolo repeated it 
yesterday that at that time they were not going to be able 
10 
to pay salaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, thank you.  Mr Seleka? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you.  Mr Molefe during that time 
did you know or even prior to that time did you know Dr 
Ngubane? 
MR MOLEFE:    No I did not know Dr Ngubane before I got 
to Eskom, I know about him, in fact he was the ambassador 
to Japan and ...[intervenes]    
ADV SELEKA SC:   Face the Chairperson. 
MR MOLEFE:   Sorry. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Face to the Chairperson. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes, sorry Chairperson.   He was the 
ambassador to Japan and I think I am not sure if my 
memory ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   He was a cabinet minister at some stage 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 76 of 102 
 
before that as well. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
He 
had 
been 
a 
cabinet 
minister 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...[Indistinct – speaking simultaneously 
and at some stage. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I can’t remember if he was still 
ambassador but we went there and we did a deal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Japan? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, a Japanese Yen deal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   While he was ambassador. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  While he was, so we did a deal in the 
market for South Africa, South Africa issued a Yen bond 
and we went to Japan to sell the bond to Japanese 
investors.  I think I may have been with Ms Makato, she 
was the head of foreign funding, and while he was there, 
while we were there doing the deal as a delegation 
representing the South African government he hosted us.  I 
mean that was the first time that I had actually interacted 
with him closely and then for many years I never interacted 
with him until Eskom. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   What name did you use, the first time 
you interacted with who? 
MR MOLEFE:   Dr Ngubane. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Oh is that the name you used, I 
thought you used a different name. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 77 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I don’t know his name ...[indistinct – 
laughing] 
ADV SELEKA SC:   The reason I am asking is because Ms 
Matsietsi Mohkolo says prior to the decision being made 
for you to be seconded the Minister, Minister Lynne Brown, 
gets called to a meeting at Eskom with Dr Ngubane.  At the 
time he is an acting Chairperson of Eskom Board.  In that 
meeting when they arrived, that is the Minister and Ms 
Mohkolo, they find the Chairperson of Transnet, Ms Linda 
Mambaso, they find Dr Ngubane, and Mr Sithemba Khoza 
10 
who was at the time the Acting CEO. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  And according to her impression the 
person who introduces the idea of your secondment to 
Eskom is Dr Ngubane, so that is the reason I am asking 
you did you know Dr Ngubane at the time?  
MR MOLEFE:   I cannot comment on that meeting 
Chairperson, I do not know anything about it, I wasn’t 
there, in fact I was away ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Seleka you may have 
20 
understood her evidence like that, but I understood her – I 
think I understood her to be saying at the meeting the 
person who raised the subject was Dr Ngubane which I 
didn’t necessarily understand to be – to say there may not 
have been discussions prior to that meeting which he might 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 78 of 102 
 
have known nothing about.  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:    Yes, no that is a fair assessment 
Chair 
because 
I 
must 
also 
say 
in 
addition 
to 
that 
Chairperson the same question was put to Dr Ngubane and 
Dr Ngubane said this was a follow-up meeting according to 
him, so there was a meeting before and this was a follow 
up meeting.  According to Dr Ngubane it was the Minister 
who asked him to second you, who suggested that you be 
10 
seconded to Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I think Dr Ngubane’s evidence 
seems to be consistent with Mr Molefe’s evidence. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because Mr Molefe says the first person 
who raised this issue with him of moving to Eskom was 
Minister Brown. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dr Ngubane said that the idea that Mr 
Molefe should be moved to Eskom came from Minister 
20 
Brown. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Minister Brown. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...I think that’s consistent ja. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 79 of 102 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, but Chairperson I was referring to my 
consciousness for the first time I got to know it is when the 
Minister literally calls me aside during a function with many 
people and we speak in low tones, and she says would you 
go to Eskom.   It didn’t take three minutes and that was it 
so I don’t know what happened before and after. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no that is fine, ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No that is alright.   Ja, because just 
for your information, I am not – you may comment or you 
may not be able to, you see how the dots connect it is 
10 
because the central figure – you’re laughing – the central 
figure in this is Mr Salim Essa who as we have already 
indicated to you the evidence of Mr Hank Bester in 2014 
who says this is what Mr Salim Essa said, we have already 
decided that Mr Molefe will be the CEO of Eskom.  Then 
you have on the 10 t h of March 2015 when Ms Suzanne 
Daniels ...[indistinct – word[s] cut off] Melrose Arch.  Mr 
Salim Essa introduces himself as the Minister’s advisor to 
her and that refers to Minister Lynne Brown. 
 
Then you have again the involvement of Mr Essa 
20 
when Mr Tsotsi does the composition of the sub-committees 
of the Eskom board.  That Mr Essa proposes to him who 
should be on those sub-committees and Minister Lynne 
Brown gives Mr Tsotsi the same names or list of names that 
had been received from Mr Salim Essa. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 80 of 102 
 
 
And Mr Tsotsi is called to the Minister’s office where 
according to him he finds the Minister with Mr Tony Gupta 
and Mr Salim Essa and the Minister insists on a particular 
list for the composition of the sub-committees. 
 
So when the Minister then comes to you it seems that 
there is more than just the Minister behind the decision for 
your secondment.  You may want to comment or you have no 
comment?  I am just painting the picture to you. 
MR MOLEFE:  I am tempted to comment.  Chairperson if you 
can observe events some of them imagined some of them 
10 
real and you observe them either in your head or outside 
happening.  And then you decide that you would like to paint 
a picture.  You can paint any picture. 
 
These thoughts these mythical thoughts can be 
construed from anything.  Related events or unrelated 
events.  You can take things that happen – that happen in a 
particular way as a result of coincidence – that happen in – I 
am telling you that I do not know about these meetings.  I do 
not know Mr Salim Essa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  And yet you take all these events that were 
happening.  Well I can even ask – I mean on the day that Mr 
Bester and Mr Salim Essa had that meeting was it raining?  
And was the fact that it was raining part of the dots?  Or was 
it a full moon?  Or anything can be connected to anything 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 81 of 102 
 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  People who come here and say they are 
connecting a dot and then as I am sitting here I can look at 
the sky and imagine a lion and actually connect the dots 
between the different stars – the stars at night.  You can see 
a lion if you look very carefully if you connect the dots. 
 
So Chairperson I – in law there was a – I do not know 
I had never studied law.  I know a lot of people who did but I 
did not.  But there is a theory of causation.   What – if 
10 
somebody wakes up in the morning and starts by going to 
the bathroom and comes back and sleeps in the kitchen what 
was the cause of that?  Is it the fact that they woke up and 
went to the bathroom but because they – so you can connect 
the dots to anything and in fact this – this is a matter 
actually in law that is dealt with quite extensively about the 
theory of causation.   
 
You cannot go and find all sundry events and try to 
connect them and find causation. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I think they call it the theory of causation.  
Approximate 
causation 
not 
all 
the 
events 
that 
were 
happening in a restaurant in Melrose Arch for a discussion 
that people had on a rainy Sunday evening and say that it is 
– you know I even think that day maybe somebody got to a 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 82 of 102 
 
traffic light and caused an accident. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  You could say that it was because of that 
discussion. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  I think it is very [00:04:36] of the – your 
response that you were not in those meetings. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I was not in those meetings. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Let us leave it there Chairperson. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Ja.  I think… 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   I think we can ignore the fact that I tried to 
venture into the law. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no, no but you remember we 
spoke about perspectives even if it is the same facts.  Part 
of this is for you to be able to say well I do not know about 
this and that but there is a flaw in this risk game when you 
try to connect this and this and this as I see it.  So I was not 
there but this does not connect.  So that perspective.  But if 
you say look I do not think that this means anything really.  I  
mean that is -  that is fine. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I think therefore Chair my comment to be fair 
Mr Seleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Is to say that I note that you are talking about 
events that happened; that I was not aware of most of them.  
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 83 of 102 
 
They may or may not be for me a picture.  I cannot – have 
not definitively said and I do not think anyone can say that 
there is a picture that you draw from events that are 
carefully selected to paint the picture. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Yes.  No thank you Chair.  Yes… 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Well 
maybe 
we 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
completeness we may as well also mention this and if you 
have got something to say you can use the opportunity to 
say if you really have nothing to say you can – you do not 
have to say anything that in – according to Mr Mcebesi 
10 
Jonas. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja he gave evidence in the commission 
and said he had a meeting at the Gupta residence on the 23 
October 2015. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said Mr Duduzane Zuma was in that 
meeting, 
Mr 
Hlongwane 
was in that 
meeting – 
Fana 
Hlongwane and he said there was a Gupta brother that was 
there.  I think initially he said it as Mr Ajay Gupta but I think 
20 
later on he said he was not sure about whether it was Mr 
Ajay Gupta or one of the other brothers. 
MR MOLEFE:  So he does not know who said it? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
what 
did 
emerge 
through 
the 
investigation of the commission I think is that – and I think 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 84 of 102 
 
Mr Duduzane Zuma accepted is that Mr Tony Gupta was in 
the house on the day of that meeting.  But Mr Duduzane 
Zuma and Mr Hlongwane their version is Mr Tony Gupta was 
not part of the meeting he popped in at some stage and 
wanted to speak to – to Mr Duduzane Zuma. But he was not 
part of the meeting. 
 
But Mr Jonas was adamant that there was a Gupta 
brother who was having a meeting with him.  He said the two 
namely Duduzane Zuma and Mr Hlongwane were quiet most 
of the time.  It was just that Gupta brother and himself were 
10 
talking. 
 
One of the things that he said they – the Gupta 
brother said was that: 
1. Mr Ntlantla Nene was going to be fired as Minister of 
Finance because he was not cooperating with them or 
not working with them or something to that effect and 
we do know that about six weeks later Mr Nene was 
fired as Minister of Finance. 
And then he according to Mr Jonas he wanted him to 
agree to take the job of being Minister of Finance of offered 
20 
him some money. 
 
But one of the things that he says the Gupta brother 
who he says was talking to him that he said was that there 
were certain people that they were working with and among 
those he mentioned Ms Lynne Brown and he mentioned you.  
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 85 of 102 
 
 
And according to Mr Jonas the Gupta brother who 
was there said among other things that Mr Brian Molefe’s or 
Brian Molefe’s career is well taken care of.  I am using my 
own words something to that effect. 
 
So there is – there is that as well.  You might say, 
look  
1. I was not in that meeting.  I do not know what they 
were talking about.  I do not have any comment.  Or I 
do have some comment.   
But I just want to make sure that you are aware that 
10 
there is this evidence that Mr Jonas gave and if it is 
something that you had not looked at and you would rather 
deal with it later when you come back that is fine as well. 
 
But if you say look I have no comments about it that 
is also fine. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson the evidence of Mr Jonas he 
says he was at that house I think I remember that he said 
somebody was in the passage – he met in the passage.  He 
does not know who that person is.  Even as you are 
describing now he thought it was so and so but then maybe it 
20 
could have been so and so as well.  And that person who he 
does not know said we are taking care of Mr Brian Molefe’s 
career. 
 
Now the weight of that evidence is very – is light it 
cannot be heavy – it cannot have a lot of – even though this 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 86 of 102 
 
is an inquiry and this inquiry can accept hearsay because 
that is what it is it is hearsay. 
 
Even though it is an inquiry that can accept hearsay 
but the quality of that hearsay is actually very bad.  Because 
he does not know who he heard it from in the first place.  
And he says that he – I think he even said that that person 
was not part of the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he said the Gupta brother was part of 
the meeting. 
MR MOLEFE:  Now the person who said that – who talked 
10 
about me was not part of the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MR MOLEFE:  He said the person who talked about me was 
not part of the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  The person that Mr Jonas said 
said these things about you was the Gupta brother that he 
said he was having a meeting with. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh I thought he said it was somebody who 
was passing on the passage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay but I – I cannot comment on it.  I deny 
that there is any Gupta person was responsible for my 
career.  I was responsible for my career and – and that 
especially because that hearsay evidence is not even 
corroborated by anyone.  Nobody else overheard what they 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 87 of 102 
 
were saying or came here to say that we are taking care of 
Mr Molefe’s career. 
 
I do not know whether it happened or that Mr Jonas 
is remembering it wrong or it is just a figment of his 
imagination or that he cannot distinguish it from something 
that he dreamt to something that really happened. 
 
I do not know but I can tell you now as under oath as 
evidence that there was no Gupta brother that took care of 
my career. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I do not want to – to say took care 
10 
but – of your career but I think in my recollection of Mr 
Jonas’ evidence is that it was something like your career is 
taken care of.  Maybe not necessarily by them but your 
career is – you will be fine in terms of career. 
 
But let us complete the whole thing because we have 
now talked about it.  I mean I do not know what finding I will 
make about Mr Jonas’ evidence and Mr Duduzane’s evidence 
and Mr Hlongwane’s evidence about that meeting.  What I 
will ultimately find to be the case. 
 
But if I were to find that indeed Mr Jonas was told 
20 
these things by a Gupta brother in that meeting and he was 
made the offer that he said he was made that if he agreed to 
be Minister of Finance and work with them bla, bla, bla it 
may well be that the – and the fact that that Gupta brother 
seems to have known in October already that Minister Nene 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 88 of 102 
 
was going to fired as Minister of Finance.   
 
It may well be that it would be reasonable to say it 
looks like the Gupta brothers were looking to get a Minister 
of Finance for the – for the government who would meet with 
their approval. 
 
And I have heard evidence about Mr Van Rooyen who 
was appointed as Mr Nene’s successor.  He has given 
evidence here as well.  He indicated the number of 
interactions that he had with I think one or other of the 
Gupta brothers between October and December before he 
10 
was appointed and there has been evidence about the 
advisors that he appointed that is Mr Van Rooyen. 
 
And there is the investigation of the commission led it 
to ask some of the people who were officials of the ANC in 
March 2017 I think that is when Mr Gordhan was fired as 
Minister of Finance. 
MR MOLEFE:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Asked what reasons Mr Zuma may have 
told them why he was firing Mr Gordhan and they filed 
affidavits Mr Mantashe, Dr Zweli Mkize was Treasurer 
20 
General at the time.  Mr Mantashe was SG and Ms Jessie 
Duarte they filed affidavits which are within the commission 
and if you have not been given copies you should be given of 
copies. 
 
One of the things they say is that yes Mr Zuma did 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 89 of 102 
 
discuss or tell them his plan to fire or leave out of cabinet Mr 
Gordhan and they say he told them that he wanted to replace 
Mr Gordhan as Minister of Finance with you.  
 
And they say in those affidavits the officials of the 
ANC all rejected that idea.  And we do know of course that 
the person who are – who replaced Mr Gordhan as Minister 
of Finance was then Mr Gigaba. 
 
And in the meantime I think in February 2017 if I am 
not mistaken you became a member of Parliament National 
Assembly for a few months.  I think in May you resigned and 
10 
went back to Eskom. 
MR MOLEFE:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you might be able to say, look I have no 
comment really on these things but I mention them and if you 
have not been given the affidavits that I am talking about 
arrangements should be made for you to have been – to be 
given and if you want to say let me read the affidavits first 
and deal with this issue later when I come back that is 
acceptable as well. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja but Chairperson I feel it is a bit unfair that 
20 
people come here and say that we were gossiping about Mr 
Molefe in his absence.  And that I was at the house.  I do not 
know about the – the fact Mr Jonas is making whether it took 
place R600 billion and so on.  I am not commenting about 
that. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 90 of 102 
 
 
The fact that they talked about me at the meeting that 
I was not there and I am not aware of.  And it may have been 
Mr Mkize and a discussion at Luthuli House about me it was 
gossiping.  Because I was not there.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not think it is fair to say it was 
gossiping because this was the President of the country Mr 
Zuma and President of the ANC talking to his – to the top 
leadership of the ANC the Top 5 – Top 6 to say this is what I 
am planning to do.  And I guess he was confronting them. 
MR MOLEFE:  So they were – they were talking about me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not think it is fair to say they were 
gossiping. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well I do not know what is the definition of 
gossip but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sure you talk about a lot of other 
people when they are not there but you would not say you 
were gossiping all the time. 
MR MOLEFE:  But that is what gossip is.  I do not know but 
20 
… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Especially… 
MR MOLEFE:  But let us not use the gossip then but they 
were talking about me and I was not there and I was not 
aware of their discussion. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 91 of 102 
 
 
I do not know how that should reflect on me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no that – there is a… 
MR MOLEFE:  Or how I should take accountability. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no the idea. 
MR MOLEFE:  For those discussions that took place in my 
absence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No as I say 
MR MOLEFE:  Or how I should then now in a commission of 
the inquiry explain myself about discussion that took place in 
my absence about me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see as I say you know you might 
say, look I know nothing about it and I have no comment 
about it.  Or you might have some comment.  But a possible 
scenario might be that you might say I do not know.  You 
might say, well I am not surprised that Mr Zuma mentioned to 
the officials of the ANC that he was – he wanted to – they 
wanted me to replace Mr Gordhan because he had actually 
contacted me and asked me whether I would be prepared 
and I said I would be prepared so I am not surprised. 
 
But you might say I am surprised because nobody 
20 
ever talked about that to me.  So the idea is just to enable 
you to say what you might know about these things. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja I know nothing about it Chairperson and I 
will not comment on it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 92 of 102 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes I – one should 
emphasise that Mr Molefe there is a process of investigation 
in gathering information.  Ultimately the law makes a 
decision 
based 
on 
the 
evidence 
presented 
if 
it 
is 
uncontroverted.   
 
But the decision is not made based on reading the 
stars or making imaginations.  So we are in the process and 
the end will be based on the evidence. 
 
Now in addition to the secondment issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Seleka I just realised we have 
10 
gone over one o’clock. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Oh we have gone.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let us take the lunch adjournment. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at nine minutes past one we will 
resume at ten past two. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are supposed to continue but we are 
unable to continue because we have received news that 
somebody that works closely with me has tested positive 
with Covid-19.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 93 of 102 
 
 
It seems that in those circumstances, because I am 
required to isolate myself, that we cannot proceed in this 
form.  I took the trouble during lunch to ask Mr Seleka to 
share the information with Mr Masuku and an oral consent – 
I understand that there is an agreement that that is what 
should happen.  Namely, we should adjourn.  Is that 
confirmed? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is confirmed Chairperson.  I did 
convey the message to my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, to Mr Masuku.  You confirm?  Ja.   
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  It is unfortunate but it is the reality 
that we are faced with now and we have to find ways of how 
better to handle the situation because if each time somebody 
that has been in close contact with me tests positive, the 
hearings of the Commission have got to be disrupted, then it 
could pose quite a problem for the Commission’s work and 
us finishing in the time within which we must finish. 
 
So I think that, from my side, I think we should explore 
the possibility that if all concerned are available sometime 
20 
next week on one of the days, we could explore the 
possibility of having the hearing via a video link or via Zoom 
from – and I would be sitting in my place of isolation.  So we 
must explore that and see whether it is possible. 
 
Obviously, because next week was not planned, that will 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 94 of 102 
 
only happen if Mr Molefe is available, his legal team is 
available.  I am saying next week, we could find a day where 
we could do that, because the Commission has been 
informed by the attorneys representing the former President, 
Mr Zuma, 
that 
he 
will 
not 
be 
appearing 
before 
the 
Commission next week. 
 
He says that should not in any way be seen as 
disrespect on his part for any legal process.  It seems that 
he says it is because he believes the review application that 
he has lodged should be finalised first. 
10 
 
And that also, there is the matter that is in the 
Constitutional Court which has not been finalised.  I am not 
trying to exhaust every reason that he gives, but I think it is 
fair to give, at least mention that those are the main reasons 
he gives through his lawyers. 
 
So we know that he is not going to be here next week.  
So it would be good if there is a way of using it, at least 
some of the days.   
 
So I do not know whether Mr Seleka you had any chance 
to speak to Mr Masuku, but if you have not, maybe a 
20 
discussion can be had after to see what is possible and what 
is not possible about sometime next week in relation to 
continuing with Mr Molefe’s evidence but via Zoom or 
something. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  We did have a chance to speak 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 95 of 102 
 
about that Chair.  We – I know my learned friend was 
expressing, what, some advice on that, I would say.  And 
maybe he could be given an opportunity.  Is that right?  To 
address the Chairperson.   
ADV MASUKU SC:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   He is fine but he thinks we should 
consider some factors ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   ...that might require us to self-isolate 
and... 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no.  That is fine. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The idea is that we should all talk about it 
and see whether ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...we all think it is something that can or 
should be done ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...or not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know.  There might be something that 
one is overlooking. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just that one, it is trying to make sure 
that there is as little disruption to the hearings as possible. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 96 of 102 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   As possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Given the time constraint – limited time 
available. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But obviously, that assumes that one is in 
isolation but is not feeling unwell. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That assumes that one is okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is one of the things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And...  Ja.  Maybe Mr Masuku wishes to 
10 
say something? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  I am thinking Mr Masuku you 
must be saying:  I may as well use this one that they wanted 
me to use earlier.  [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   Not that one.  I must just accept that...  
I mean, the – we have to follow the Covid protocol once you 
were exposed to someone with Covid.  And one – you are 
quite correct that you now need to go and isolate.  But it is 
not just you who must isolate.  It is your staff. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no.  That is true. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   It is everybody that is.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Carry your bags. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 97 of 102 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Carry your books. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And everybody else. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And it seems to me that we should not 
really be in a rush to some hearing tomorrow ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...or next week without knowing exactly 
what your state of... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:   What the state of the situation looks 
like. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I would propose that maybe in about 
five days when the fog clears ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...and you still feel okay ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...then you can write to everybody and 
say we can reconvene. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And we will make sure that Mr Molefe is 
available to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   We prefer being physically present. 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 98 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And of course, this place has to be 
fumigated as well because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, no.  That will be done, ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So it is quite an inconvenience 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...to be exposed to this kind of thing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But it is quite vigorous. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no.  It is. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So I would suggest that we do not 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not fix anything so far at this stage. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And in respect of the other matter you 
mentioned, the letter, the love letter you received. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Perhaps that also resolves some of the 
difficulties we would have faced. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   [laughs]  I just thought I would mention 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 99 of 102 
 
that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, when I saw the letter, I wanted to 
say to you – I wanted to say, you know – you do not have to 
take the fifth amendment.  [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   No, that is just. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  So I think that is a fair – 
those are fair points.  We will adjourn.  And if we end up 
being able to use some of – sometime next week, good.  But 
10 
if we end up not being able because of whatever, it is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As we go along, we are learning in terms 
of how to best handle the situation.  And maybe, if and when 
it happens next time, I hope it never happens, but if it does 
happen, we might be better prepared in terms of some of the 
things that can be done.  I am sorry that we cannot continue 
but it is one of those things that one has no control over. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay.  No, thank you. 
20 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   We – from the Eskom work stream, we 
were going to have two evening sessions.  So those 
sessions will also be impacted.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 100 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ms Goodson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And Ms Naidoo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  The one that we arranged for 
Tuesday. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Tuesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that will have to be cancelled for now. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the one that was this evening 
10 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   We were going to explore in regard to 
Ms Naidoo, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  We will talk early next week 
and see.  Maybe Tuesday and see how things look. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Okay.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I told mister... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I told Mr Masuku that his attorneys wrote 
the letter prematurely Chair.  So... 
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 101 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   [laughs]  They would have taken 
advantage.  [laughs]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV SELEKA SC:   They take their hand too soon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  No.  Thank you very much 
Mr Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   We can say, it is divine providence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]   
ADV MASUKU SC:   There is a ...[indistinct] [laughs] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Okay no that is right.  Mr Molefe, 
I am sorry that we cannot proceed but obviously you 
understand the situation. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I do understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Arrangements will be made for 
the Commission to continue with your evidence as soon as 
possible.  Ja.  Okay.  Thank you very much.   
 
Then I have announced that for next week Mr Zuma will 
not be appearing before the Commission in terms of the 
letter that the Commission has received from his attorneys.   
20 
 
But the week after next.  If one is able to work and then 
one is fine, it will be – we will hear evidence relating to state 
security.  That is the week after next week.  Alright.  thank 
you very much.  We will then adjourn for the day. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair.   
15 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 329 
 
Page 102 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS SINE DIE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
